How are you? Btw thanks for the RT. You gonna be in DC anytime soon? Love to see you. Been way, way too long.
When you meet someone special... you'll know. Your heart will beat more rapidly and you'll smile for no reason.
they've decided its more fun if I don't.
So Tired D; Played Lazer Tag & Ran A LOT D; Ughh Going To Sleep Like In 5 Minutes ;)
Words from a complete stranger! Made my birthday even better :)
First Cubs game ever! Wrigley field is gorgeous. This is perfect. Go Cubs Go!
i no! i get another day off from skool due to the wonderful snow (: and THIS wakes me up...damn thing
I'm coo... Jus at work hella tired r u ever in cali
The new sundrop commercial ...hehe love at first sight
we need to reconnect THIS WEEK
I always wonder how the guys on the auctions shows learned to talk so fast!? all I hear is djsosnekspqnslanskam.
Dammnnnnn what a catch
such a great picture! The green shirt totally brings out your eyes!
Desk put together, room all set up. Oh boy, oh boy
I'm doing it!👦
Beauty Brainstorming in the Alchemy office with and Sally Walker!
Looking for a new band to blog for the month. anyone interested?
Packing for a quick move down the street... If only I had some movers...
ford focus hatchback?
RT : According to the National Retail Federation $16.3 BILLION was spent on #MothersDay last year!!
“: "The tragedy of life is not that it ends so soon, but that we wait so long to begin it." - W.M. Lewis”
More skating! Come by the check out a movie, eat a great dinner and top it off with great times at the ice rink.
watch your mailbox! : )
Tommorows the day...
Good questions. RT : Your #brand will be judged based on its #website. Is your website a good brand ambassador?...
Don't care what others think of you, and you will save yourself a lot of mental energy that instead can be used to push you towards success.
This Ron Artest interview... is it possible to die from laughter?
Linda! Just looked at my sched & I have to hustle back to Chula for P.M. meetings, so no time 4 lunch. :( Do u meet every Fri?
Bum Squad lets get it! RT : Shout that ninja out for winning
I love you, and I'm so proud of you. From sitting on those stairs on The X Factor, to now. You boys are my inspiration.♥ :) xx
Maybe some other time I can't slow down, right across that state line right about now
Exhaust leak! arrrgh
i Love Reading your magazine (: it always cheers me up
Tables are all sold out for the Mystique Masquerade Ball.
Make one up! It might help you feel better. Alternative: just scream nonsense at the dumb machine.
ya ik and i never asked him to follow me i only mentioned him once in one of my tweets- i didnt do anything else
I will <3
Great talking to you guys tonight! Looking forward to your piece next week Jon.
Small market baseball. You, know...for the 99%.
Sing it!
it comes on tonight!! not tomorrow!!
maybe? just seems they thought up that idea over sunday brunch and thought it was swell.
Thanks for the #FF! Awfully good company to be in.
"The longer we live the more we find we are like other persons." ~ Oliver Wendell Holmes
made my list for top 99 women.
nice I watched the whole series, LOVED Julia and her mom Erica was such a badass
GOP line on Obama gay marriage stance seems to be that he flip-flopped. Really want to use that with Romney as your presidential candidate?
I know, I know. Then you kick yourself when the fight goes lopsided. But if the upset DOES happen, wow. Nothing like it.
No stress balls or keg and different crew -- but these guys know how to party
William Davis attorney says client will plead insanity. He faces first-degree murder charge in woman's death
#OccupyMadison GA: "I always considered myself a liberal until I saw the liberal machine in action. It was ugly."
Weird thought: we got to witness the change of a millenia, the next change is 40 generations away...imagine what the differences will be!!
got a good one?
love chris brown
Wit them sexy ass lips
its sounds good
How (un??)fortunate that those days when every status update was a song lyrics were also the days when I first discovered New Wave...
I had a bomb ass day Chillin' with friends.
Working on music for Holiday show on the 23 in Santa Barbara!! OPEN BAR!! Me, Tim from Palin White T's and JR Richards from Dishwalla!!
Hey Nate! Thanks for dropping by yesterday. How was your meal?
#FF : literary lights who brightened my week.
Time to shape up! Water, pavement, weights, and zija are going to be my friends. wedding just 4 months away!
Report the many things that are positive about the University of Arkansas athletics program.
Athletes/celebrities should have a tool to charge $.99 per RT request. $ to support foundations/charities, fans get involved.
Enjoy!! Stay cool!!
"...yo chick she so thirst..." aye!!! I really don't know what else they're saying tho except that lol
talks in third person.
. many things can happen. Only YOU can control your reaction to it. Practice this good
"You will allow me to continue to do what I love." Big Show's wife?
haha very cute! Have u heard from julie?? Who's that on her fb I'm tryin not to laugh
and somedays youre the windshield wiper
I'm taking Adam! :-)
lets do this
Not much, Ben - how's you?
Sarah trying to explain to my teacher YOLO, lmfao .... >>
#Inspiring RT : Great minds must be ready not only to take opportunities, but to make them. --Colton
med school...wow! I could never do that. Am too OCD to be around blood and sick people for long periods of time ;)
Sleeping? Not likely. RT : Sleeping to
Time for lunch!
Not being dependent on anyone for your happiness >>>
This humidity is not sitting well with me at all !! #NeedACInSchool D:
Do u know whats creepily??? I Hate Cheesecake. Its Cake with Cheese in front of it!
thanks. Got it at walmart!
Still haven't seen #Super8? Every 88th check-in wins a free movie ticket. 45,347 check-ins so far!!
RT Congratulations to the for advancing in the #stanleycup Playoffs! They defeated the #Sens in a 4-3 series.
Hey hey hey , can i meet chaaaa ?!
Ghost Hunters makes me cry :( <3
Who's going to the OVW show tomorrow? your team dominoski will be in the house! First brew after the show is on me!
just waking up but #therave last night though>>>>>>
at six flags.
Thanks Tom.
They're not applauding because you don't have a button!
« im not mad.. it just sucks that i cant show you off.» THIS!.
I'm at little league majors try outs in
Where my meatballs at? and Naomi :)
Doing some #cufon testing and implementation in #wordpress. What the FOUC d'y'all think of cufon?
lo mejor! it was cool experiencing work through the eyes of an excited teen
Me: the only b word u should call a girl is beautful! Colin: or a butterfly!
I just think that the zooming is overused. It needs to be done tastefully. And it's not the point.
If you have Firefox or Google Chrome type in "let it snow" into google today.
hahahahhahah u just made my day :D
I can hear "High and Dry" through the walls. Amazing.
RT : **IMPORTANT** Our new hashtag is #SNTCK please tweet your #specialneeds resources and writings with us to share
Proud to have voted twice for the SAG-AFTRA merger. Have you voted yet?
this conference is rockin'
Pretty sure that was a broken leg.
Keith was also good a smoking in the dugout and being a class a jerk. I grew up a Mets fan..sorry to admit
She's calling you back - is having a moment ;)
Reward yourself for just getting up in the morning. It's a wonderful accomplishment!
Big ups to for leaving voicemails that Google can accurately transcribe.
#GET BETTER
Everyone say a prayer for my brother who is at Wrigley field with his wife and kids. She and her daughters are in Cardinals jerseys.
Why you actin like that towards me now
Have a great evening/afternoon/whatever it is where you are, folks!
experience of a life time!
Hey how did you like Dogtooth? I watched like six months ago but don't know anyone else who saw it.
The average gossip and complain. The exceptional create and inspire. #leadership RT
#OneThingYouShouldntDo Spam someone to DEATH! it's like stalking them ... Like really?!
me too
Buffalo we do appreciate you following Poised Creation on Twitter!! :)
I promise you can go ten minutes without hanging on his arm.
Snap backs and tattoos
Fallout from the original, actually
who is your favorite tv mom?
Hey Giants fans. How ya feeling tonight. Boy, do you look dumb in that stupid panda hat.
out of twitter jail i see.
IT PUTS THE WOO IN MY WOO!
People can keep talking/Thy can say what thy like/I dont worry cause everythings goin' be alright/No one get n way I feeling 4 (JESUS)
Drawn Dead will be at the Wynn today giving out free shirts!
the fact that i added an extra "d" on the end of "just" amplifies its greatness that much more. Oy vey.
Hmm, I got hacked--do not open that link in the DM that was sent from my account. Sorry!! Yikes.
dont break my butt
you're welcome(:
O.. intrigued by ! We're in negotiations for building our new website...
So what do you do in OKC?
the fact that lives on an island makes me wanna shoot myself because i need to see her at least every other day to feel sane.
Players were Tebowing before Sat NFL Astroturf Collegiate Bowl. Praying in the end zone before the game and Tebowing a great stite
Yes they can :)
Hahahahaha, I love it. Thanks for the quick birthday lesson :)
; Im Almost Up To Youu!
Tonight should be fun ;)
I spy at Zeitgeist Coffee :)
Thanks for the retweet!
“: be quiet poo balls.” I'm writing this on my wall
Sarkozy? More like Sark-oh-no-he-didn'tzy, am I right?
going through #RNRCHI bag & wondering if people *actually* pay $60 to do the "ready to run" 20 mile training run.
That's game we lost I can't hate on the Heat Good Game
The #Marlins wish they had 5000 in attendance tonight...
#9 for Nelson!
Tweetin while I walk. Check my walkin soundtrack!
are you visiting again?! 'cause that would be awesome!
no it's the interview he told us about in class member?
Who has the bigger stick?
These late night walks are still religion to me. Thank goodness for these.
Is that a rhetorical question?
I want a new phone case. Preferably a sparkly one.
Everybody in the class is laughing at this part and I had no idea what was said :p
Bestfriend just got hit on my a 30 something year old
thanks for the follow... Your Gorgeous btw! ;)
oh boo :( and here I was promoting what I thought it would be to a friend yesterday! Let me know if the cobbler needs help ;)
"Collaboration addresses complex problems more effectively because there are more perspectives in the room"-Gary Mangiofico
cinco de mayo fiesta at la carreta is packed!
Dallas slapped me on my red as cherries sunburn, and im still crying aftr 10 mins., i hate him.
is that kind of place. Like in DC. Ladybugs lurv it.
#Well Done 2
I was born 2 weeks early? Haha
cant wait till
you are gorgeous, em!
That’s what I thought, just wanted to check before I rework it.
adele gets off a standing ovation right away?
Keep moving, and get out of the way
“: yeah, l could be the bigger person, or you could just shut the fuck up.”
anything intriguing going over there? Any clues on who the browns draft next?
Being chauffeured in a brand new Range Rover w/ and Happy Derby day!
I lost 5 pounds sweating in sparring class today.
Let peace find a toe hold in this tumultuous world.
Reminder: we play in Dallas tonight at the den. 10p start. See y'all there.
me, too!
And thank everyone of you who has taken the time out of your day to listen to us, your all amazing, much love h2p
in MD MIAA-A Boys Lax action, St Mary's Annapolis goes into Loyola-Blakefield's house and leaves with a victory. 11-8
#FridayThe13th is the best movie ever....and todays date.
The poor needs relief, and they need it now! Somebody help!
Okay so apparently it's not new? Sorry for having a life and not listening to music all day long. :)
Heard PM was in #Broncos training facility all day, even had a 2 Hour
that is hilarious! We need to do what we can to feel young!!
I had the weirdest dreams last night.
scrapbook class. Next up: hinged reattachment of enclosures w/ wheat paste and Japanese tissue! It's like I'm at nerd camp.
If your girlfriends parents pay her cell phone bill...
thanks... I'll definitely be using some Edmundson
This Little Girl by Cady Groves..... I <3 it! Look it up :)
YourKoz Games+Find out who this is-$2.00+She concentrates on the calibre and quality of education for Jordanian children & global education
can u please RT or follow? i'm one of your biggest fans :)
The tea party movement filled the gap in republican party on intolerance for overspending.
Flores says vocational training is "his backyard." Admiration for police, nurses.
In Krav Maga there are no rules, no restrictions
Thank you! I'm proud of us all!
I love you brianana
"As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." And we will embrace our LGBT brothers and sisters.
im following u so u cant welch lol
Plan on being a DJ (:
I actually saw a police officer on horseback galloping through downtown.
8th grade was so great though! & we all said we'd all stay close! We should all get together ASAP.
so? It's not the same.
got that vol. 1 return of the bodysnatchers bumpin. Perfect for the gym! I'm going I'n right now!!
is our new Twitter pg. Follow 4 exciting deals, ATX challenges, & insights on #fashion, epicurean, entertainment & the arts
Daddy got a new truck(:
Freakin is FLAWLESS..in every way!
he's next to go bro
Thanks for finally providing a good night's rest! and I had a great time! Hope your run post beers was good!
I love my momma :)
Hello new followers!
Not sure! Any recommendations? RT : Hey Chicago! What are you eating at the Taste of Chicago this weekend?
Mayoral Candidate Forum on education this Thursday January 21, 6pm at Warren Easton, 3019 Canal street.
Ah I miss that place so much! We def need to do another road trip this summer
Join the Maui Mall Shoppers Club at www.mauimall.com. We give away three great prizes monthly, including $100 gift certificate to the mall!
busy day. I thought called about Film but it was same name dude who is a set medic. #internmistakes!
total white cat move
I actually liked Derek Morris as a Ranger.
Twovsuns massage is now offering couples massage! What a great way to start off your valentines day! Call to schedule today!
Stellar of to reply. #digiday I find the lack of women in marketing/pr leadership interesting- it's an area of research for me.
Enter to win an Orioles vintage cap by email or tweet the answer to: Which 2 O's pitchers hold the record for the most opening day starts?
Prepare for testing season by practicing to read standardized instructions in dry monotone.
What Is A Life Without A Purpose? What Is A Purpose Without Love?
got to fa the one time one time and nope that shit stressede the hell out boa
that's the beauty of self-publishing, you can find your audience without publishing types.
i'm waiting patiently for the videos of the tram ride and pics at Yoga! :-)
Congrats to Patti Groff, CLM on winning the Spirit of ALA Award - a huge honor recognizing leadership and dedication!
Finally Going to bed. Had a long night but atleast it was for a good cause. ❤#RelayForLife ❤
Haha. Works for me sometimes. ;)
Send details and I can post.
Wearing my 2011 shirt to the #Skrillex show in Indy tonight. Already got a lot of compliments.
Howdy Ali - good to meet you too!
The scent of Coco Chanel perfume will aways flood me with lovely memories of my dear Aunt Lynn.
"We All Got That One Friend whose laugh is always funnier than the joke."
Fact: Girls have a lot of crushes but their heart only belongs to one guy.
Number one SEO mistake? Not doing on page keyword optimization.
Count on me! ;) RT : better get your own party started!
I hate when i wear bhoops and people are like " the bigger the hole the bigger the hoe" and im just like. O___o bitch try me.
Be the light in the world of darkness
#kids Little Stage Puppet Theater: Little Stage Puppet Theater Friday, May 11, 2012 at 6:30 PM Monrovia California 518 E. Colorado,...
lost one dream, so now i'm gonna pursue an even greater one
Interested to see matte football helmets next year. Not convinced, yet.
oh man I want some French toast so bad now...
You mean... a winky face is not the correct use?!
omg Jesus loves me SO much that sometimes my hair falls out. Then I pick it up and burn it as an offering. It feels so nice.
No you Not!
Hi there Sueanne! Liking the newest avatar! Getting to be beach weather, right?!
The trip home feels twice as long. Even with good music and junk food. Too bad I don't smoke anymore.
: Thanks for ther RT about Administrative Professionals Day.
Tryin to stay up for loiter squad
looks like its a jquery problem. in this.selectMenuItem, this refers to the document, right?
Can I get a refill?
Sitting in the doctors office 😖😰💔💔
ha nah that aint me
Hey everyone, please follow one of the best metal drummers ever, Paul Bostaph,
Wow. Bollywood and Smash are still trending. That's how good tonight's episode of #smash was!
seriously? I'll have to check it out!
Just saw this tweet, it was good to meet you too! Thank you so much for your support! MT
are you coming to get Donovan
OK just asked to have it shipped should have it in the next few days
Engineering Dev Manager-excellent leadership opportunity in Bellevue
Sometimes "no syntax error" doesn't equal finished; it equals actually beginning.
Listening to The Faint always makes me think of you :) Its not bad for paper-writing music!
Sleep with one eye open.
Loved that beer, thank you for sharing
Successfully set up Nokia Education Delivery server locally (MacBook Pro) but am at a loss for user guides.
/ That, Alberto, is part of our "secret sauce" for the game. They are not aware, as that could bias gameplay.
hell yeah! How much are the tickets?!
Thank God, Lifetime, and Thank You John! I hope the show lasts forever on television, this show is very valuable to all of us!
Teen Wolf Trailer Omg I can't wait till it comes back on!!(:
U Said "I Will BE THERE WITH YOU",But #Wisconsin NEEDS U NOW. GO spend & campaign there
Late night last night.
#Pittsburgh WPXI interviewing family across st whose chimney fell down during the earthquake. Tempted 2walk out dressed in my Batman outfit
Time to dream bout some crazy ishhh goodnight 💤
okaay (; LOOOOL i still remember our thoughts
it's my fault I'm sorry
hey Clifbar people, love your stuff but need more info on this arsenic in organic bar business in the news today. What's your take?
Chicago roadtrip status: ACTIVE.
Watched 'Anatomy of a Murder' tonight. Have u seen it? Late-50s courtroom drama that you would surely appreciate.
Happy Mothers Day all Moms from me& FloboRojan RT: , " Yearning 2 hear well done good & faithful servant..From my Wife." (cont)
Hard to believe but The Great Online (formerly ReignNet) has accumulated over 150 customers!
Griffin shoots on his way down. Irks me.
Hey shawty, I was thinkin of you (;
theyre gonna win just to fly to miami tomorrow
sweet! Let me know what you think. “: can't wait to read Humanize by !”
Stop trying to control everything and just let go.
It is an absolutely gorgeous December moon.
God has so many amazing plans for you :) I can't wait for whats to come and some new music!!
yup-there's all kinds of sneezing & sniffles in my house lately.
we're apart at a ray
Holy shit my mom can talk. About the SAME. DAMN. THING. That everybody already knows.
Coming up on a year with Twitter and not much to show for it...
Ok I need a remote starter asap:-(
I could go for a nice post dinner cheese plate. What kind of host are you, ?
Just had the best snow cone, imperial woodpecker in NYC- get there
I need to see so many movies.
Why do I always buy the biggest wedding gift?
younger guys is in the rotation hopefully behind CC and then RF prob with Swisher and catcher
Thanks! Still need Help/Suggestions! I had another 6 commitments Saturday from the young youth group.
I deserve to know it's GMO.
Started today at 5 with meditation and a double iced espresso. I think I have found the magic morning combo!
I'ts your blog and you are well aware of the link. Don't play dumb with me.
Need to vacuum
The panna cotta is a must make!
If this whole journalism thing doesn't work out, I think I now know what I want my second career to be.
because they're "bad bitches" aka bitches doing bad, close to the lowest female life form, next to jersey chasers
Man I am in the weeds today at work. Someone bring me ZKabob and brighten my day :)
Don't forget.... our 5th annual #Cuts4aCause is TOMORROW from 9-3!!! Don't miss out on this amazing event!! Call 414.988.4165 to book!
At first I wasn't sure (because I'm vegetarian), but some of their menu does look good; especially the cheeses.
I'll go without before i beg for something...
RT : And IU moves on to the next round of the tournament!
Silverton "Skip the Strip" New Year's Eve celebration. $10 wristband all you can drink 9:20-12:30
I need two new tires .
NBA #FanNight Chris webber my dad likes your glasses! DC13
sometimes you gotta do stuff you really don't wanna do.
- Sounds good bro
I'm digging The Offspring right now.
Thanks for the RT! :)
Enjoy this sunny day with a smile on your face and your head held high cuz u never know when the dark clouds will roll in
because... Why? Doesn't look like a keg. Guess it usually smells like one, I guess.
No worries! We hope you find ours interesting and helpful as well!
#Spammers I'd like to see the statistic on what spammers cost american small businesses in a dollar amount. They cost me so much...
Cory Booker is on my tv.
If the #2 pencil is so popular then why is it number 2? 😳
plz go follow she follow back ;D and i will follow you too :D
Chasing The Sun is honestly a very very amazing song. IT'S SO ADDICTING, lol.
Brandon don't joke like that
RT Drake Be Sounding Like He Be Crying His Ass Off When He Be Singing Sometimes ! lOl hell yeah
" Motivation and inspiration energize people, not by pushing them in the right direction as control mechanisms do but by satisfying basic...
I thought you were strictly Infrastructure bro? You doing sharepoint dev roles too now?
no I had the kids. The ex kinda dropped them on me
Playing with fire again.
Ad2's "When Creatives and Non-Creatives Unite" is March 13th. Stay tuned in to Twitter and your Email for more information!
awesome! Although a little jealous bout the Jordans! Haha!
join the club that plays #unfollowfriday every week! It relieves stress!
you said that u cant say boys like my head...yet i have a bf..so obviously he likes my head
Do you need a custom "welcome gate" for your business page? We can do it! Need social media management? We can handle that for you, too!
-OR- "Moons Over my Hammy" lol M
Missing a very important page from my booking notebook...this isnt good.
gets a standing ovation on Leno!! Freedom is catching.
Sorry for the technical difficulties tonight guys. One day soon we'll have proper working equipment!
it should keep that same letter everytime u plug it in.
My Facebook doesn't look any different. Can I say Facebook on Twitter?
The thing I wish I could say to you but knowing I wont<<<
is doing some work! Check them out.
got the 12th pick,12team league,somebody help me....
you never know!
That song still gives me chills!
Aight heat nation victory nite 2nite... Lets go heat
I love talking to this kidd
Thin air will help so the offense won't have to drive as far.
Whoa! Whoa! Koala's get chlamydia?
RIP to the day when Titanic sent more than 1,500 people to a watery grave
Lakers would do well to keep drawing fouls on the Thunder bigs.
is there a worse place to get drafted than Cleveland?
can somebody make me a spaghetti diagram showing the connections among all of these data citation programs? Overwhelming...
Well, we're getting close to completing the album!..See the journey!
Going to bed, Night <3
Just finished "one thousand gifts"....what a read. Just ordered 4 new....hate waiting!
I just love when my mother forgets to pay my phone bill. Sure hope I don't have a wreck on the way home and have to call 911.
I just swabbed for Janet Liang tonight! And I'm actually home tonight to listen!
Josh Hamilton CRACKS on CJ for 19 home runs on the season!!! Dude is in a ZONE!!!
Does anyone get blown out on the road more often than the Lakers?
girls over 150 should stick to sweats and bags over their heads
Is your last name Trump? Mine got $5 for the first & $1 for each thereafter.
haha its the culture B haha
LA MUJER DE IVAN @ 8:30PM. Screened as part of The New Chilean Directors Showcase.
haha your full of it! Its a gray day and I'm stressed but doing OK. Ha!
Well there might not be any crying in baseball, but there is a great deal of it in skiing.
I would love to connect sometime. Where are you located?
yessir you are correct
I want steak and crab so bad right now. I'm thinking a late night grilling session later.
You will absolutely love it after the first 75 pages. So, suck it up and get that far. It turns on a dime.
You know, football isn't nearly as fun to watch when beer isn't involved
Being abused
I found Toure Neblett much less of a jerk than one name Toure, the delusional ego maniac with an opinion on everything.
Anyone out there looking to buy hunting land in Northern & Central Wisconsin this fall?
OMG MediaTemple NameSevers are down! Somebody's going to be in trouble.
"#Mathematics is made of 50 percent formulas, 50 percent proofs, and 50 percent imagination." And #mathematicians prove this all the time!
can I set up an interview with you guys?
wow I have snake bites again
Phillip Humber threw a perfect game will never stop talking about it haha
Happy Casimir Pulaski Day! Only in Illinois...
Guys.. make me upset.
Is everyone Getting Along??
So it's worth watching? So afraid to commit to another show.
Yes, you should be mean to the foster dog so he doesn't like you. That's the ticket.
aw. Okay
I want to get 100 followers already! Follow me!
i guess they think they doin somethin by changing my fb password nd im the Lil Kid lmaooo
I'd like to know how much household help & had when the boys were infants & in school!
iv never felt this for any guy. u must be special <3 its a thing called true love <3
I didn't say it wasn't a good question. I said its not a good question on Mother's Day
Surrendering isn't just about letting go...It's about letting God!" I surrender all!
“: Rooney Rule: You should start #eating right, getting #sleep and #exercising soon, because soon it will be too late!”
Richard Welsh is Steve's Dad. He is hoping #TeamSoaringHigh from Colorado, where the Welsh family lived a country road or 2 from each other.
!++-~| G1 CERTIFIED WET TSHIRT CONTEST --- FRIDAY CLUB DRAMA --WANT TO GET IN FOR FREE?? TXT ME I WILL TELL YOU HOW---214 609 3316 --
#Startingnow I want ALL those girls of the world to know that they are beautiful and that there should #notbebulling and it should stop!
I miss Ryan Dunn =(
What a beautiful fall night in Seattle! I love this time of year
Now that everyone has graduated, I'm off to never never land
My Name Is MAHATAA is BOOK OF THE MONTH at Agape for the month of February, leading into book signing in mid-March! See you then!
good cause the cowboys could use him in two years
San diego mayor talking about the necessity of art despite hard times!
Some things are easier said than done.
Thanks for the RT! I hope all is well with you!!
Kind of wish I wasn't going to prom...
Lol. Shep Jr. don't care!
: ALL seized Full Tilt #Poker funds, incl. payment processors, should be used to reimburse players. THX
Congrats to all who made last night a sellout..come
yikes.."since 2007, RIM has introduced 37 models" -- A Boggle of Blackberrys nyti.ms/tKK5hZ
IDIOT!!! Ban him!!
Ok I need kush rehab real shit
RT: it would be amazing and the best thing yet... if u were to follow me yee:)) 11:11
Taking orders for custom clips, pic sets and webcam shows!!!! ;)
Lobby of Marriott playing Bruce (Hungry Heart) waiting for NJ crowd to arrive
I didn't get home until the saw the sun coming up... I went hard last night
ugh i know.......long night Smh
Sad. The guy who created the Mustang Cobra passed away today. My favorite car!
UK sucks. UofL all day
One day.... :) “: dude! You guys need to come through Canada already haha”
Tommorow is B-day nd Everyone should Wish Her A Good One. She is One Of Are Biggest Supporters. So S/O Nd Love You Pintos :-)
Take a risk today! Cooperation is key to executing complex business tasks – but competition is at the heart of innovation.
#Brewers upcoming series this week: 2 games at NY Mets / 2 games at Houston / 3 games vs Twins
"life is too short, gotta live it long"-Chris Rene, love it!!
Started revising the chapter. Your suggestions are helping this argument along so well. I can't thank you enough!
I know that. But others don't.
Have you given your presentation yet? How's the conference going?
"I look all summery and like a volleyball player" made my day !
Yea..I curse like a fucking sailor. But I'm working on it lol
Dream interpretation: It's about sex. That'll be $125.
send the pizza in the mail. :)
I guess so. Sure hope its soon enough
Up early thiis morning nd now its back to the studio. Got a couple traxxs to listen too nd possibly layiin dwn a track. W.O.R.D.
Another Great Workout This A.M. Just Smashed This Breakfast. Now Headed n to the office for a Productive Work Day
#ICantStandPeople who think they know it all or start a conversation but don't keep it going
Why do the last words of tweet line 1s repeat at start of line 2s?
RT probably a defense mechanism against dissonance from viewing oneself as civilized while acting savage/barbaric toward others.
I am so glad you like it as much as I do!
I love getting drunk on occasions. Are u out or in home?
talking about moving beyond "the idea of giving your reputation to a social network and letting them monetize it"
Melo is a scorer nobody can stop him at all! He is usually threading scorer not this year though
following u
« I want a large cherry berry chiller .»
screw everyone and come to Baylor
So happy to finally be home. I missed my family so much.
you've been fed a complete diet of propaganda your whole life...now how will you vote?...the only way you have learned thru inculcation?...
I likee both of them ;o
TWEET this: #AmpTopTrend with the name of the song or artist you want to hear on . Every hour you choose a new song!
i can't even begin to tell you the feeling i get..when hearing my beats play..better than any drug. -McM
is on Tuesday and watching A Man Apart...one of my favorites!
Beyond frustrated... Shit!
no way you looked like a boy BUT- I feel you sister! Judy cuts my hair and she's a bad ass. She will make you look great.
hey. why'd you decide to join twitter? hopefully i can be your first reply.
Assert your right to make a few mistakes. If people can’t accept your imperfections, that’s their fault.
I wuvvvv you
I knew something was going to go wrong
I will happily provide cookies in exchange for answers. Very sad to hear about #Awake you are an exceptional writer.
hahah! It's a heart!
Hahaha! I'm sure he'd indulge you :). For some reason I'd love to also hear Tim Burton's opinion about Inception... :P
She said put a candle on my back baby blow it. I'll blow dat back out aaiight
Romney shouldn't feel too bad about getting whipped today. He did end up winning American Samoa, so he's got that going for him.
These are the days of miracles and wonders. Believe and it shall be
Forgiveness comes by growth. Your growth.
I used to give a damn, but I'll never give a fuck
10 Tablas Creek Vermentino. Delightfully true to type. Sweet tart balanced. Crisp, bit spritzy, green apple, pear, citrus 89 pts
"I'll just have the salad"
i dnt have fb sry. but if i did i would ill RT
USDA Completely Deregulates Genetically Engineered Alfalfa-WTF!!!!
Live music tonight in for a drink or two. Don't forget free parking!
Vacay can't come soon enough.....ugh
Whats up twitter world?!?!?!?!
Home from S+J. Gotta get some rest for the 3am Black Friday shopping trip with the man I love . . . Mastercard. I mean, Matt. LOL. *z*
#EllenRTme day 159 & 160 It's been such a great weekend & I have no iPhone so this is a 2-for-1!
CONGRATS! Plan on directing or being a DP?
...and I just drooled coffee all over myself...HAPPY FRIDAY!
how many ppl in it ?
The retina is the film of the eye. It converts light rays into electrical signals and sends them to the brain through the optic nerve.
Sharon Osbourne has morphed into a Cabbage Patch Doll.
im really really really obnoxious.
Should do a video to that classic shit I'M KILLIN EM
Awwh Love how much you care for us(: it means alot knowing you love us and try to stay in touch with us!!(: we love so much!(:
Ha! Which article? And shouldn't the missing period FAILED to stop you in your tracks? Or maybe, omg,the New Yorker is pregnant!
no, it's a marker!
It's Mom's day so I probably won't be around much today. Kiss your mommy for me! xoxoxo
Awww you thought Brown was going to say something
I keep taking my temperature on the royal wedding and realizing that I don't care.
Jam lead the D-Fenders 29-19 after one period of play
u got a service pack?
hey as long as you get to celebrate.
Im sending my love out to everyone with intensity purpose & passion! ((hugs))
Killed my first NYC #cockroach last night w/ - sign me up for the worlds strongest man competition!
hey man. Thought about you last week - watched the 'my star' video. Thanks so much again for that!
#LazySundayafterafun saturday night. LOVING/LIVING THE MIAMI LIFE in SHALLAH.
Storm headed toward La Plata? Uh oh.
Don't worry about it. Won't change in the course of a day
can I breath?
#FF to for a fantastic #OpenAccess #OA meeting of the minds this week.
Hello hello! How are ya today? I'm feeling pretty great myself. I had #SUBWAY for breakfast.
ActorFest 2010!! Visist us @ the Academy booth to enter to Win a free adimssion to a Casting Director Workshop comlpiments of the Academy!
Graduate! Yeah! Time or some well needed R & R
the mc rib, all 4 all time favorite whataburger sandwiches? is this real life?
Yeah :D
YES girl -_____- pathetic
Dear out of state super PAC supporting #WalkerFailure: WI is dead last in jobs. That's not considered progress 'round these parts.
That Dr J. And Larry Bird fight is a funny ass fight!! Lol
cutting Clifton today frees up a big chunk of change to the tune of $5.7 mil. That should make a difference
Midway through an extraordinary performance by In Mulieribus at St Stephens -- like listening to angels sing.
And what will you do with your extra day? As an entrepreneur I'm guessing you're still working today?
Follow the crew members
what a promising name
okay good. lol have fun! xx
i just wet my pants again. oh my
Holy fucking traffic.
So I guess Wiltjer is staying
HAHAHA guy fieri is driving the pace car. seriously. wow.
Its raining I want hot chocolate :)
Back in the NINES office, catching up on everything...
under age drinking is just as "bad" as smoking weed; still definitely illegal.
Internet Cultural Network: PBS: Jazz - Risk directed by Ken Burns
yeah maybe I got so mad and then the thing I said about Astonia (spelt that wrong)
sounds like a mad and crazy scientist to me. Hope the nurse is okay.
We need YOU to become a part of something big- a rally for Clean Water. Wed, March 28th, 9–11am RSVP: .
Lost last night was ok. Highlight was def. Sawyer putting Jack in his place. Love him! Anyways, just 24 hrs til I'm in Houston! Beer Bike!!!
please don't ever shut up. You are full of WIT.
It's good to be in New York when the Knicks finally have a good team.
So, how is the ride going so far?
not as much as I need YOU in my life! Love u munchkin :]
why would you have to beat me up? & what did do?
No One Saves Us But Ourselves. No One Can & No One May. We Ourselves Must Walk The Path.
yeah.. So far i know 's staff , MLM, maybe and co are coming.
Cool--good luck!
Life is GREAT!
A5: There's room in every trip for a bit of adventure.
this one is in the books. GO BUCKS! BEAT CUSE!
RT : RT : #musesocial What does it mean to curate a SM experience? is it possible? any benefits?
How can Liberals/Progressives/DemoRates tell Lies so easy, no problem, they don't believe in God
#medlibs Please know the online planner sends emails to the email you used to register for
How was that not too many men?!
I'm not speechless often, but I have no words right now. :P
Awww Verizon is making me sick.
I know right? We have used his phrase against him. XD
If you live in Anderson, IN check out this week, for your chance to win tickets to on February 16th.
Sing a song of living before everybody dies.
Go to Mad Planet tonight. You'll thank me if you do!
Congratulations Cheryl - great leadership insight "I have to know you to grow you". Thank you!
#FreeDan RT : that's wild blocked me. wow.
My goodness! You're always busy. You don't believe in failing so I know you'll be fine.
follow me on tumblr bro
Stoked2 present my program "Spanish in the inner city" to LUL inorder2teach Spanish 2black adults after-work.Introducing AfroLatinos to KY!
Thanks to Dr. Billingsley, Dr. Willihnganz, & Dr. Rhodes. A special thank you to our conference planning team!
ugh okay?
RT : I'm happy to announce #BWENY will be held from June 5th through 7th, which falls during Internet week.
Just realized my childhood friend/neighbor is dating
Varsity game, avoiding him. :/
Early news on Mariano's injury sounds REALLY bad... He'll go for an MRI but it's sounding like his season, and most likely career, is over..
Where to begin! I've been lucky, privileged really, to be schooled by so many wonderful teachers.
You are very welcome!! Thank you as well!
Don't miss & Friday night at ChickieWhaWha on Canal Street from 8-10p. Song from their CD "Bridging the Gap"!
Finding Nemo is one of the best movies ever created.
Coffee is brewed, eggs are flipping, fruit's fresh, bacon is sizzling. Happy Friday!
New York City was shweeeet
2 for Tuesday tonight @ Opal Bar!!! Pretty simple- Buy ANY drink, get 2 instead. Extra bonus- NY Knicks on all of the flatscreens
great quote: "we have this challenge of intent where the outcome in user experience terms is not matching the tools"
I never thought sleeping in would mean waking up at 9:30
": If you love and respect her, don't cheat on her. Real simple."
you program drums to homie???
Love is like the wind, you can not see it, but you can feel .. :)
Congrats and best of luck on your new restaurant!
I was gonna watch The River tonight. It's perty skerrryy. Wanna join me?
Some girls don't realize what they're worth. Some guys don't realize what they have. Then she leaves after realizing. Then he realizes.
Hey Boston-busy tonight? If not, come check out the lineup@ TT's (central sq) featuring my clients What Time is it Mr. Fox?!
Nice! do any of them have wifi? I know it's kinda un-zen, but would allow me to stay longer n work..
am I wrong, or in the middle of a financial crisis, our new Pres, who campaigned on change is spending more $$ then any of his predecessors
. You are definitely on a humor roll today. Thanks for the laughs. I adore a good pun and #sickjoke is brilliant!
Time flies when immersed in building a database. Wheeeee !!!
speech-language pathologist by education limited PR/marketing knowledge. Any must read book recommendations?
knew that oddly
RT : Life without music: flat ·
Wewant to extend our network of individuals who would want to cooperate in building independent music! Is that you?
At the #EmbassyofBrazil Party time!
yeah my stupid ass phone cant record/play vids -___- FML!
Yes! So! WTF? I thought I was the only one.
hey i was only referencing the fact that I completely humiliated you..and im the baby of the group
Back in LA after long drive from Vancouver...Check out the Dancing Ninja on IMDB, WE HAD FUN SHOOTING IT
not yet, im coming back tomorrow night :)) my brother is coming home in an hour so i'm baking him a cake :))
Marketing a product similar to others? Research their successful strategies but don’t copy! Once you know what works test new strategies.
I'm BEGGING you all to read my status and re-post it. We are running out of time! Especially if you're in California, please help!!!!
The officiating in this NCAA tournament has been TERRIBLE...so many calls that are blatantly wrong
Nice!! RT : starting at your fav place and I know he wants a bloody or 4 but the night
some of the sickest visions at my disposal... spell it out... I FUCK'N TOLD U...
I hate missing school
hey i love you ! you should cme to nyccc <3
xs tonight for avicii lets go NHL in town haha well the non playoff teams
RT: ladies, showin a great amount of skin when u dress up isnt the way to find Prince Charming.He likes his gifts wrapped
Imo: toxins in the body inhibit the ability to feel and express love. I sense so much more love, in me and in my environment, after a detox
i am eating an egg sandwich while looking at the menu of the restaurant i'll be eating at tonight
soo.. another day canceled. I quit trying to make plans. :|
Preparing another large mural for remounting today. Pictures to follow soon.
Harvey's intro is total doom & gloom so far. I suspect he will acknowledge some? positive expressions of urban social movements
I bet if you were here in Miami / Lauderdale u would like a bad chick would. In my Rkelly tone ....lmfao send me something nice.
Are you aware of any news organizations that will be livestreaming the Celebration of Life for Jr. Seau on May 11?
true, true. I need good treatment then! The hell
So much for trying to sleep early.
When asked me if my sister was buff like me, I was like Lmao!!! no we just look alike I guess lol
Talking to him>>>>
St Luke's church at 100 W 86th street taking donations for #INtornado victims today at 9 am
Organizing is much more than cleaning. One is putting things where they belong, the other is knowing why they belong there.
Yes , so glad I made it!
thanks for forgetting me
I love all your CB tweets. It's like reading myself tweet. We agree on so much! Seriously can't wait for S6.
lol was dying reading that. You know me brotha, ain't a thang to worry about. Born ready #problemchildontheloose /Cc
Mr.Gay! We could be so happy together!
i missed first 25 minutes of show. i wonder if news will infiorm #Vegas about similar difficulties tomorrow?
Anyone else going to tonight at #viejasarena? See you there!
Tina Moore and the Just Us Trio tonight at 9:30. All ages, no cover - nothing but great music!
Tweefer beef going on PLUR is what we live by Peace Love Unity and Respect.
I love my neighborhood.
you know what helps? giving me your EFFing account number. bc I can't find your library card # based on the email address you never gave us.
U ever get tired of hearing the radio... then start listening to the cds u have, & realize.. u got your cd on repeat just like the radio?
this weather is horrible
#WordsYouWillNeverHearMeSay Obama rocks!
when and where is your next show?
yes, that is a reference to section 5K1.1 of the federal sentencing guildelines, allows downward departure from typcl jail term
ha! That's hilarious.
come back here! I wanna babysit baby Mariam!
Idc I can't sleep so someone bout to be up wit me dammit *pouts*
Not since the Atari 2600 made it's way into my house in...awhile ago, have I wasted so much time. Angry Birds is the crack of the app world
im willing to pay:)
I could use a couple of cups of coffee.
Holland. First stop coffeeshop.
Ima Go Sleep (:
any sub category suggestions? #sex being the topic?
I've been voting all week<3 And guess who is in front of Joe Jonas?! You are<33 Well deserved.
So Tweetcaster seems to be working for me. At least it isn't crashing...
Seriously though, Lightning Bolt was a Philip Glass tribute band, right?
#nms30 something fun for every little American History learner! www.historyglobe.com/jamestown/
Nice to be tweeting with you, tell us more about Castleton Christian!
oh yeah we don't want that :/ lol
Lol! I knew something was up!
RT :David Ferriero wants all of the enormous National Archives digitally available. If it's not digital it doesn't exist.
thanks for following. What caught ur interest in my profile? Your music site sounds promising.
have u entered the twitterverse??
A man. A bit older than your Eoin, I guess. But not decripit.
One aims to achieve complete self-forgetfulness, while at the same time developing complete “mindfulness” of the character....
I just ate
Before you reference your information, ask yourself who is the author.
Streeter on drop in draft: “I’m extremely hungry. I kind of felt like a lot of people didn’t believe in me even though I believe in myself."
Because ACUs are ruddy expensive, and we're already spending $225,000 next week..
I'm proud of myself :)
If love isnt a sport, then why are there so many players.? <\3
having an allergic reaction to one's own perfume is not fun.
don't matter. Were gonna party just as hard!
I have a winter coat and flip flops on
Love, love will keep us together....*breaks record* FUCKING LIES! IF IT WAS TRUE MARIO WOULD BEG ME TO RETURN!
top score on putt putt mcdonalds game
I absolutely love that song!
Jam lose 109-90 and have been eliminated from the playoffs
haha!!been up since 4:30 with the birds chirping outside. Lol!!!
Weird that my laptop speakers can play all kinds of things at once. In the 70's our cool stereo system played only one thing at a time.
About to shower...roll up..then go to sleep. One
“Success to me is having ten honeydew melons and eating only the top half of each slice.“~Barbra Streisand
You should be able to restore all the photos from a backup in iTunes
My favorite part of that meeting, is Pres. Bush's fantastic purple socks
I follow you. Would you follow me? Thanks. Much love. Dr. Spanish
Thomas Alva Edison~ Just because something doesnt do what you planned it to do doesnt mean its useless.
Surpassed our #grizzgala fundraising auction goal! Building the OUAA scholarship endowment, thx to sponsors & the great auction donations!
This is how dedicated to Joss Whedon I am: Cabin in the Woods will be my first in-theater scary movie since Blair Witch. Seriously.
ITS A GIRL YAYY!!!
ready for georgetown
Santorum pulled out leaving his mark on the back end of the republican side of the race
Friday the 13th = quality movies on the tube!
BFAR 10 to hold investment forum on mariculture park project in MisOcc - Philippine Information Agency
Juiced lemons. Simmered w simple syrup n rosemary. Freezing it and flaking w a fork every hour. Adding to champagne bar on Easter.
Haha, thanks for the RT, I am obviously very excited about these data-related developments :)
There are different standards for different sports. Glad to see Tiger apologize though
Some of our friends R pathological liars & snakes we could smell venom on their breath and their words are phonier then cubic zirconias
Eternal God, help me accept each day, each moment, as a gift from you, not to be wasted. May this season bring us closer to you and to...
Funny presentation for Colin Firth since he probably hates Margaret Thatcher just like every other Brit.
Stupid bitches <<<<
Make your bucket list now it's the end of the world as we know it. Only 11 months and 21 days. happy new year!
You're just begging me to unfollow you when you tweet your horoscope.
It's Sunday already? :(
FAC can't advise if FAC isn't informed.
The Italian writer Antonio Tabucchi dies in Lisbon.
sorry ignore the random hash tag lol but still congrats that's great !
six million dollar man
I'm so sleepy and I gotta get this school thing going... :/
LETS GO #KINGS GO KINGS GO
And to those making my world a better place. Happy #FF @ @ @
I am so excited about this new change. New discounts and savings for you! Our new website will be: www.austinhormonedoctor.com
webinar overload day, 's #ContentDisco is up next
For the record, I came in the top 20%. There is still a tiny chance I'll win if they don't find someone in the top 100.
wow. That exam was bs.
I know! How was your trip? Miss you. Would love to catch-up for real one of these days...
I hate biology.
Just bought $NNVC on patent approval news
enthusiastic teachers were the bane of my childhood existence...
I know, right? I really liked Rachel's English accent... :-)
It's rainy out here on the East Coast, thank God for wigs!! Lol
for my birthday I would like you to answer all my phone calls with the Rachael Bowen hey for 365 days.
Fuck this sun!
It is true! You do good things. Always have. Now you get to do even more! THAT is wonderful and appropriate and deserved.
I hate it when I don't feel like talking and people just keep on talking to me -.-
I mean, Second Mile is funding Sandusky's defense, refusing to turn over internal records on clients and victims. Why is this not a story?
Hahahahahaha so close I did this one.... 💑
Try the eggplant fries too.
#IThankGod for my family and friends:)
i seriously want it to be Saturday already
Just added some interesting articles at www.bowlingdo.com... also have new retail site at www.shopbowling.com
Time to get down to #business...JenoLo Clothing coming in 12 days
Congrats to : WCHA reg season champs! One more win or Minn loss gives UW outright title. #Badgers home next wknd to host OSU
omfg Raven and Hilary are my favorite Disney stars. I had a feeling!
Proud Momma Alert: My 6th grade son won the school-wide (K-8) science fair! Goes to school district regionals this Friday!
that pic was actually from Denver
I can't sweat it cause I know I'm going to work this out
Fuck these dumb ass trays
that's great! I know u r.
okay 😊 we found a lot on the beach
QA - Algorythmic vs aesthetic dataviz: equally subjective? Both predicated on statistics, q of objects vs patterns
A girl came in and handed me an application....
nah don't say that...you gotta come to Vegas first lol jk.....it'll prolly be Bobby Brown tho lmao lemme stop
Interdependency follows independence. -Stephen Covey
Would have to know investment, objectives, metrics, etc.
Sure-- but then what's the point of the various "time windows" for elites? If you have "A" available why not confirm me?
"Excellence is a guilty pleasure, bringing confidence and peace of mind"
I think there was a bit of mystification about the material facts of making, which is (I agree) odd considering what CP is.
Hahahahhahahahahahahahahhaha RT : Can you still experiment in your thirty's?
Look forward,not back.Focus on the future not the past❤
Going to be on during the 6oclock hour! Listen in!
I swear I have no black clothes... Ugh
Soccer on ice? That's probably the only way you'd get me to watch it! I'm a 100% hockey fan :-)
Have MITT ROMNEY ever had a PLAN OF ACTION or A SOLUTION. I can see myself being rolled into surgery and being told, "YOU ARE OWN YOUR OWN."
I have many mornings like that Some days more dead than others some more confused, some more stupid, some just lost altogether
Coverage of the Orlando Predators vs. Pittsburgh Power begins in just three hours on Check it
Black Friday!
Effin birds did a number on my car this morning... Bout to wash that ish😒
yup, I feel ZERO responsibility for YOUR trauma. I finally get to point & laugh.
if u have 13 ice cubes and i have 38, how many pancakes will fit on my roof? The answer is purple because aliens don't where hats.
I'm bored at home.
Undersea cable bill gets 1 last chance in Senate
Whoa one direction is having a arena tour in 2013 yay lol
#whatwillgagawear what ever is laying on the side of the road
i make money money make money money ayy
Wolf Gang is neither a Wolf nor a Gang. Discuss.
yeah and ain't missed nothing smh
or can u help me get more followers? It would ne awesome :)
are they beefing over sports? i am late.
Malaysia mosque a source of hope for heroin addicts - Chicago Tribune
yes, we're finising it up now. Not as cumbersome as it was made out to be.
It was indeed!
Any of your friends need some new music?Tell them to check us out on Spotify. It's free and awesome!
dude i'm freakiing out! idk how to do it onmy own! :'(
You waist time trying to be someone else, it takes no time to be YOUR self....
why? You want to still be friend?
Huge congratulations to new law graduates, and remember to thank your mother!
in Ghostwriter app when you move away the iPen from screen you can turn page, zoom in and out. I meant the iOS iPad multi-touch.
Simple little kind of free
If you let words hurt you, you a lil (b word). Use those words to make you stronger.
Ready to go -____-
Follow my new flick written by !
no it's okay! Don't feel bad!
i'm not gonna be here much longer... :(
I had to Hang up on Charles...that nigga be Snoring too Loud lulz
What up Woo
I am today...not tomorrow though.
WOW Grany g is hillarious in
ive been with the family
he better watch out I might eat his too.
look forward to your #SocialMedia tweets!
wow, what a smile! And I can't forget the hottie!!!! :-)
why the :(
oh I know... But I don't mean like that. She works at a television station here. She's adorable and it's a boy!
I still can't get over it yet. Honestly that is going to stick with me for a few days. Its almost belief changing. :-(
make it crack then nigga!! (at least tweet sum pg dead dan a mf lol)
Told to stray away from what I am, said the world would never take it. Design a mold for me to fit and watch me break it.
Cyberdating in China: Woman w/ duck's egg face seeks handsome devil, not from Wuhan, no Virgos. Illuminating piece on "#romance by
Does anyone else remember when the best place to watch movie trailers was apple.com?
You know me all to well.
please follow Artie so happy to see you again xo
total "duh"
Looks like Astros want to be like Larussa & cards!
Go back to India
holy shit ya someone DMd me some pics and crazy shit u I had a feeling u didn't send it
I dont regret a second i spent with you.<3
& Sick dancing last night guys, it was great seeing you guys.
RNWK down 7.5% on news of my departure (perhaps slightly influenced by earnings release).
PLEASE FOLLOW AND TELL HER I SENT YU! SHES A HUGE 1D FAN! AND AMAZING AT SINGING! FOLLOW FOLLOW FOLLOW
Oh, I like that process! Naturally allows for more focus by students on each type. Also love the "TARGET" idea fr earlier tweet.
Our marriage functions through Twitter. It's the only way we can be sure we're reaching one another.
It's thoughts like this that catch my troubled head when you're away when I am missing you to death
I'm up even though I know my body is gonna feel the lack of sleep I should be getting later.
I figured you'd get a kick out of it lmfao
Let's go to da' beach this summer sister!! Family vaca? I think so(:
Hey #TT, I need tips/a web-site for finding last minute international travel when you don't really care exactly you go. Help!
Viva la Tampa!
it's not just him. the team can pull it off!
In Cabo enjoying the sun, sand and surf! Went to #SammysBirthdayBash last night at the #CaboWabo and survived the craziness!
just wanted to be the first say welcome to New York.. Can't wait to see you on Saturday. <3 bri
ur eyes,ur eyes, I can see in ur eyes, ur eyes, u make me wanna die, I'll never b good enough,&everything you love will burn up in the light
happy ST. Patty's day everyone!
#FF Back at ya!
Then you clearly didn't read my AWP online diary posts.
MONEY IS ALL I KNOW
#askObama Ans 7. Promotes Collective Bargaining as the reason for week-ends off, minimum wage. but all have to make adjustments in this econ
An ex is an ex-ample of what you shouldn't do again!!!!
The longer user generated content stays up, the better it gets, ie Wikipedia. True/false/both?
my heart is yours ♥
really? U just wanted ut cus it looked better with the phone cases then the black one;P haha
Btw, and I will be out there for WWDC. Beer?
Beautiful weather this morning. Screw the jacket.
+ scaling + juice boxes = huzzah!
Wishing that you could just win the lottery so you can take all the classes you want and purchase all the supplies you need.
Pronunciation guide for southerners "Bordieu" - if nothing else, try "Bore- doo."
Whoah what?! Sorry that was just odd cause I never see anyone with their name spelled like mine...0.0
for avoiding me
From a vision last night, Jesus is coming, His kingdom is so real, seek Jesus! all that matters is to seek Jesus today.
yeah I have a problem....
Catching up on #americanidol and man my predictions are spot on! New judge next season? Give me a call. . . Lol
Stop counting pages and start counting meaningful user experiences?
that was my fav one
In 3 weeks I'll be done with College..... I'm really thinking about leaving Chicago.
what do u be doing down there ?
Gonna mob either Irish or Madonna, hit me up if u wonna get ur fitness on
Taxes #DONE =)....phew, wasn't near as bad as I thought!
I can just pick you up there if you want...do you have your phone? It's easier to text you
Microsoft: Google Worried About Bing
Ready for Yelper Party!
event at the Roux House on Thursday! Get your teams and wine ready.
I'm wary of inventing new terms in general, but how about "data translators"? Thoughts, anyone?
painful but I bet you laughed! Paul has quite the gift of wit.
I am so crazy about all the characters in that book! I slowed down to a snail's pace at the end bc I was so sad to finish it. Enjoy!
no problem!
He is so dumb he can't fart and chew gum at the same time. ~ Lyndon Johnson about Gerald Ford
Loving new Maroon 5! can do no wrong in my eyes! Ps thanks for making a good ol' fashion pop song minus the fist pump beats!
where is out here in fl? and hit me up when i come to town well do a throw back swisha for back in the day
So faded
I'm a very sick child
9am on the dot? Sir you're late!
I dont care im still real
I think a lot of people, readers included, appreciate the people who only blog when they have something worthwhile
lol that counts:)
Actually I laughed at loud at yours. RT : My bad. “: I don't trust anyone who uses more than 2 hashtags.
thanks for the support! Rock on!
Chocolate chip chickpea pie underway! I can hardly even taste the chickpeas this time.
Kodashii's shoe is on Tadashii's foot! lol
did you get the information you needed to order a card? I can get you one today?
Sometimes I regret what I say other times i'm proud
Howlin circus makin waves. So stoked !
Go see it and see for yourself why you shouldn't go see it. - Samuel Goldwyn
thanks homie i appriciate it. that 80barz and Lawless are the most like how i spit. the Bodie Bag is the most recent.
Turns out, Charlie Sheen's insanity was just a REALLY early April fools day joke. Looks like we're the fools after all...
i think hes just been there so long they dont care. I first heard that in the late 90's when interned at local FOX station
The industry keeps seeking ways to circumvent the fickle power of pure creativity. But nothing's beat it yet.
Oh, by all means! Yes, ma'am!
hey whats up?
his chick is bad tho
It was nice coming home from work and see the standings flags flying at Wrigley - Phillies in the basement! Let's go
Residual Income for stay at home Moms! Best and first business of it's kind. No risk, not MLM! Give info 4 phone interview 360-217-7967
Talk to me, world!
#20ThingsAboutMe I have two adopted sisters. I want to be a cosmetologist. I'm actually stronger than I look.
nice photo! Glad you were there, it was a great event.
Most people don't really decide what to do with their lives so much as just fall into an occupation and continue doing it to earn money.
Baseball is already boring. Whats worse is a fantasy baseball draft by analytic non athletic individuals in Las Vegas. Mingling is better.
Watching Sherry Shepherd with Prince was hilarious ... we true Prince fans know what she was feeling in that moment.
RT “: Twice, Butler has been outexecuted on inbounds plays. One of the angriest timeouts you'll see from Brad Stevens."
I wanna do something wild.
With the 24th pick in the 2012 NFL Draft, the Pittsburgh Steelers select...A Pinecone.
19 more days.
Chilling in the studio! (:
Spam tweets are the devil ... Or as Gloria from "Modern Family" would say ... El diablo
Looking back, i really didn't even like you before like november of 2011...
Sorry for the alt reply, but we are thrilled with how it went down. Happy enough to do it again next year. :)
I'm amazed any fans can fit into the building when the Heat play cuz Bron Bron's ego takes up 2/3 of space with D3PO and Bosh filling rest.
RT if u like valentine's day
smoke one put it out. smoke two put it out smoke three and finally ask do u want to hit dis....
The movie was cool last night but what's with these kids not saying excuse me. They just look at you and keep on gettin up. #Grateful TY Mom
The best wwe superstar of all time
get it gurlll!
haha! He is really adapting the American way?! Liam stick with the British. Keep it that way.
YEAH JERSEY SHORE YEAH...yes that is tweet-worthy
ATT:: All #DBHH Followers, Make sure to follow #AMERICANALIENEP Dropping soon
I'm just tired of us stupid poor folk (that would be you, the GOP) continuously voting for these cronies.
Sup? Im fuckin dying here outta boredom :/
Act like a gentleman and you'll attract a lady. Act like douchebag and you'll attract nobody.
Happy National Pretzel Day! What is your favorite kind of pretzel?
I owe my followers some twitpics
Biebet wtf? What would Usher say?
sore. tired. going to sleep :D
120+ pictures and counting!
THANKS HEAVENLY FATHER TO SEE ANOTHER DAY!
We hear the game vs. the Red Sox wil be 9 innings this year, and not 7. That's what Bobby V is saying! , too!
Just heard about a vegan restaurant in Charlotte. Dairy and egg free kitchen, with a food allergy conscious staff? Don't mind if I do!!!!
Good Morning, If you could as God one question? What would it be? ask yourself today. Then ask yourself what is God asking me today?
I'm trying to get off early today...what time do u get off work?
i hate parting ways with my blankie in the morning
The downfall of us all #adaytoremember (:
Sunburn Myths Stripped Bare: Darker skin doesn't fry, so feel free to bag on the sunscreen. Not so fast...
who doesn't want to get to the juicy bits and all that bondage and sex! Don't we all wish we were Anastasia!
making it difficult for me to deal with you makes it easier for me not to want to
Really inspired by the books(reading K2 now). Heading to Everest BC in April. Any chance you will be up there? Eric
Sony CEO Rolf Schmidt-Holtz said today that pursuit of the UK's EMI, the label owning the music of The Beatles, was not out of the question.
Nice outfit Batman! Where's the rubber suit to accentuate your chest (like the movie)? Haha
“: Idkk about hving his restroom party lmao” I would let you in but they are "standing room only" events
Watch #GreatDaySA today and see what makes a 18 year old ride his bike 30,000 miles across 2 continents to break 5 world records!
Just a little love tap.
say it isn't so, a break from Twitter?! Welcome back. :-)
Enjoyed my evening...
Thanks Colin. Stoked for the fight tonight. Who do you have?
has recommended that someone move to Vienna, Virginia. What has come over him?test ifttt
Taught VizRhet? Which do u prefer and Y: Picturing Texts or Reading Images? I've used RI, but tough 4 undergrads.
i tired to help you out and commented on it lol (:
Dealing with FMS but loving this spring weather. It puts the spring back to my step & smile on my face. Hope you're doing well
Does any one Please help My friend frank.!! He needs gay people in his msn: Thanks <3
so funny!!
Sucker Punch cost $82M to make & grossed $19M last weekend. Diary Of Wimpy Kid 2 cost $21M to make & grossed $23.8M last weekend! Go Wimpy!
Awesome. Thanks! I would love more infomation.
What a shame we all became such fragile, broken things.
that makes a ton of sense!
Cautionary tale: She went to Central America for 2 mos w tons of books on her Kindle. Kindle not working.
how is that possible lol
SRSLY THO. I die every single time I watch this show.
I have a flat tire on my scooter!!
Knowledge is power, and power corrupts. So study hard and be evil.
High Fuel Costs Having Consumers Looking to Buy More Fuel Efficient Vehicles - MarketWatch (press release)
rumors abounding that Daniel Day-Lewis is going to play General Zod...hopefully it's true!
THIS. “: You can dream about it or you can go out and make it happen.”
getting new music for this weekend! #pow then out to have a few dranks!!!!
send me a hard drive I'll hook you up.
can you please #FOLLOWMECODY for ? it would make her day!40
lol the people I know are all good looking! My brother in law being one of them!
Fall out boy playing at work? Shit just got angsty
It's a beautiful day!!
MLS is a joke. Premier league is where its at and real madrid will do ok but won't be the same without Ronaldo
Mid-Penn on Mid-Penn.
Missing the Minnesota Twins this week? We've got the perfect solution for you: grab Twins tickets for Monday's game against the Red Sox!...
Due to an officer involved shooting at the San Ysidro Port of Entry, northbound ped crossing is temporarily suspended.
It's a beautiful day & the Sidewalk Sale is up. Great savings of 30-40% on an amazing selection of books, holiday cards, & napkins.
5 Week Technique Class Begins July 27th. Tuesday Evenings 7-10pm @ Actor's Intensive Studio in Los Angeles. www.actorsintensive.com
#retweetthisif if you hate work
": Don't Be A Pussy, Eat The Pussy ;)"
I'm craving Chickfla sauce and their fries.
" She chose fire "
5 Digital Tools That Make Shopping Easier
Maybe cuz it's near midnight. Everybody went home. That's why things are sucky lol Wow is it really that late? I have an assignment due
but I just ask
Oh we out here for 's birthday..see you soon!! RT : ..now on to shoot for "Who needs miami b*tch!"
At times, silence can connect you with people more than words can.
#NFL schedules are out after draft?
I just saw that press clip of Mila Kunis speaking Russian. Why is the thought of her not knowing any English more attractive to me?
i miss </3 i would retweet her tweet but it doesn't lemme. :c
Mikey can you say ''Happy Birthday'' to :)
Cinco de mayo is almost here !
Rmd just said I'm the cleanest bum he's ever seen LOL
well shit I'm glad I didn't! Jokes on you mothafuckka. :p
Girl ur so clean without a scratch does it make your heart go fast when these wild boys put in work Im a live wire writhing in the dirt.
Hey gang - before this wraps up, are there other HR related tweet chats that I should know about? Ones you could recommend?
Just at a larege PIZZA PATRON pizza........The latin life!.......enjoy!
RT #LiesGirlsTellForAttention "I'm pregnant and Justin Bieber is the father." ... HAHAHA! Best one.
So sad to hear of passing of Junior Seau. One of most feared linebackers ever! Thoughts & prayers to his entire fam!
Did anyone have a look at the video , did you guys like it
If you get upset over people who unfollow you, maybe you should take every unfollow as saving a life from the stupidity you spew.
DON'T LET HER!
The one good thing about Isagenix and not sleeping at night is that, I was able to work 13 nights of 12 hour shifts straight.
Bitch I'm high of life
until u expand the photo
Thanks for the retweet!
I really hate my life right now! I swear I can't truth any one AT ALL! I'm done. Plus my phone is completly destroyed! O m g
and he went to Inglewood in 06
What do you call a grasshopper with no legs ?A grasshover !
#edutweet what are the best educational uses for twitter? Live staff dev using book Digital Tools for Teaching
Smiles are like band-aids they cover up the pain but it still hurts.
The wisdom of the wise and the experience of the ages are perpetuated by quotations.
I know this great Bass Player ;)
You can withstand surgery with hypnosis and no anesthesia! @
What measuring stick do you use to gauge the success of your projects? Any guidelines or standards you've found useful?
go to the rio hotel on the beach
lmfao!!!!! You outta control #Bestie!! I got a dinner/movie date for Friday nite:-) you know ill tell u all about it.
2 hrs until this week's grown up talk radio. Still time to send in your ideas for tonight's show:
Apparently sleep is so over-rated that my body doesn't think I need to bother with it...
Darn! I took UK plus 50.
talking to mommy!!!
Ok, not doing the #oscars, watching #anniehall instead! :)
#wheninrva is so three days ago
Why hello LONGEST DAY EVER. I'd like to be done with you now.
Thanks, Madame Leader. You illuminated the issues. We need your voice more than ever.
No Derrick Rose and no Dwight Howard=Heat eastern conference championship
Greenwich. One of my most favorite places on earth. I love walking this area at night during the summer.
about to be live on livestream interview. Check out our next Lt. Gov!
wow full house theme song used in sarah silverman program
Watch TWIST Live and our CEO, ask for advice from and
Merriest of Christmases Tweets! Enjoy every minute of it!
I wonder what actually thinks about all the trending topics about them. Shirtless Niall #replace1Dsongswithlouisass seriously
DIRECT MESSAGE !
(And then that friend comes back for a rematch right?)
67% of US wholesalers surveyed are more optimistic on their business now than three months ago, highest % in over a year. Via UBS Survey
Alright, W. Wager. I don't know who you are or how you got on my exam list, but I will take your advice in *Enough Is as Good as a Feast.*
Boo. I accidentally threw away my list of story ideas for next semester!!
Art washes from the soul the dust of everyday life. -Pablo Picasso
as of right now at this sec pass me by!
Change is a process not an action.
Greetings, Jose! Great to see your creative spirit here!
I don't think the Browns provided Colt McCoy enough talent around him to get a fair evaluation of his talent moving forward
Perfect golf weather.
Fine, here's my stupid Timeline and my cover photo. (In protest/ under duress).
Every time I eat pizza, I cut the corner of my lip. WTF?!
correct, patent pending will probably sell a shit ton of records. but maybe someone awesome just saw doe eye & wants to sign her? or be her?
Thanks. I am. So how you doin'?
I would've never gotten that - Enjoy the concert
whoa. did he wake up? RT Will Rhymes passes out after getting hit by a pitch. That's a first
Zone block; get short yardage TDs and be tied.
Thanks for following! Love the #RonR ideology and looking forward to reading your tweets!
Completely agree RT don't think culture can be taught... culture is nurtured
thank you :)
#icantgoadaywithout rolling up.
WHOA!!!!! National caramel popcorn day-Drinks are on me!! Let's light this candle...u guys rok!
beer beer and more beer
We started watching The Sitter with Jonah Hill and I had to walk away it was so horrible
We are super-grateful for our Cavalcade sponsors!
Being able to skype with family members.
Editing friend's reel and listening to Monday Night Football on Internet radio. Auditory sensation is awesome. Luckily I am easy graphics.
Social Media--the second section--underway.
S/O to for being absolutely awesome<3
Waiting Nebu Response Im Tryna Make History
The new FIFA Street demo is kind of fun
I'm just gonna go to my last class.
thank you! We will get them added today!
By shirt do you mean "glass of wine" in place of where a shirt would be?
ISO: Executive Director position for soon-to-be unemployed colleague. Lots of experience on Assn Level.
Hopefully soon! :)
thanks! My attention was turned to two articles I am trying to get out the door, but I am going to dig back into this essay today.
My strength in this music buiz is writing..you put me in Tennessee for a week or 2 I promise I'll write a hit country song!!!
thanks Bill!! Feeling better????
First team since 2008 to win in San Diego & I'm proud to say my #Packers were the ones to break it!! 8-0 baby :D
Looks like June 1st event will be bigger than the last one!
HOW YA DOIN HARRY???
This rain makes me want too go home, cuddle up. & sleep my life away :)
Nice to see PHD trending.
May all day
man! I'm addicted to Children of Bodom! \m/
Have you ever fucked a Japanese girl?
but I still own Redbox
Finally upgraded to the iPhone 4S. So far so good. Stoked for Florida next month. Hope you are too
Please!! My goal for today is: 80 followers!! Pleaze!!(:
better question. Why do womans NCAA players look so much like men...
how's the #annualwarehousesale going ?
RT If you downloaded that new Shawn K mixtape. :)
Of course you love your mother everyday and not just one day a year.
the background section on 'what is SM?' would be a good place to pt in print some stats and history we should prolly have collected already
I need a chill day.
Feral children, an abandoned lodge, having to see things from the murderer's point of view - adds up to a great read. Nightwoods by Frazier
You would both like
Welcome MS to the Linux community. You coy thing. Your CEO says no, but your eyes say yes.
Guess that 49 year old Jamie Moyer experiment DIDN'T work
www.eccoffee.com/events TONIGHT 4-5 FREE Mary Kay Makeover and 7-830 The Indian River Band!
I Love Ignoring People , But I Hate Being Ignored .
sorry, try again. it should work now.
When I go back to school ima wish I hadn't stayed up so late
There always seems to be a call for #prayers ...but I'm ready anytime...
were rocking our I <3 One Direction sweat shirts today!!!!! :)
for every time you checking you get a new sticker with each character is so fantastic! What yup so do it. Lol
in re: that Adrienne Rich snippet: Oh Twitter, disrespecter of spaces: Those spaces mean something, you know? Something worthy of attention.
Thank you 4 being a positive role model for kids. How involved with eMVe clothing will you be?
RIP Kyle my love. You're free now.
Happy Boxing Day! In Belgium, Boxing Day is celebrated by eating a ton of waffles.
thank you so much for the shout outs<3 it really means a lot!
Yeea,haha I'm friends with him on Facebook. I take back what I say about him,he's super sweet:) lol
So what is that crazy moon doing tonight? Eclipsing?
nice. I'm not a huge fan but have heard great things.
Just spent the afternoon eating a scrumptious early Thanksgivings Dinner with the rest of the OAA Fam. Top notch, indeed.
Communication, Compromise and Co-operation, If you seek God as a couple and Utilize the 3C's it's a good Start!
I love my bestfriend! She swears she'll pay half for a plane ticket but i just cant let her do that!
really?? is he talking about history of the US or the world?
Would you consider an advertising opportunity with ? Not sure how, but would like to discuss.
If they lose, we pay your tab! #Heat vs #Lakers. Gator ribs are the specials! #whiskeytango is the place tonight!
Damn. I am one Mexican ass baby.
Thought for the week: All librarians want to do is give you free stuff. Free information, free eBooks, free internet access, free cake pans.
Lani can literally watch the same movies all day
Eliminating distractions you don't really need allows you to be more productive with the things you really want.
Ok WTF is going on it seems to me that someting is happeniing here what it is aint exactly clear
Well, I do work down there now. But I know, I'm obsessed.
Fun! RT The Race Village opens today- 10:00. Come on down we are next stadium.
Again the hazard of minimalist sculptures for texting pedestrians.
Never use the slang "sitch" and "deets" in the same sentence. I did once & it was bad. Really bad.
always good advice!
Tsk, tsk. No cell phones young lady! :P
How come my daughter got all her toys in my bed
Nobody said it would be easy, but I didn't know it would be so hard.
It's ABSURD... It's INSANE... It's Super Committee!!!
your a funny kid but um
I'm not really that important at all. I guess people like what I say ☺
Played poker with Lacey Jones for an hour tonight before I was moved to another table and was busted out. She was really nice.
I signed up for e-mail alerts a couple of days ago and I haven't received anything yet :(. How can I fix that??
Jesusspotting: at the bus station on the corner of Santa Monica blvd and Crescent Heights.
VOTING has ended... thanks to everyone who voted...looks like we missed 1st place by a few votes...so close!!!
bravo, you own 70% of my monday night sleep time with reality television.
love your wallpaper!
That was our plan all along. RT : resolved my issue and upgraded to ViP... Thanks! And bought 2 more.. Lol
A Monthly payment plan is now available for those wishing to enroll in Hawaii's #1 RE Investor training program - the Millionaire Mentor...
I wanna leave !
Running into old high school teachers.at the bar = priceless! haha
You guys! There's some kind of a professional football man in front of me at airport security!
In all my months of cleaning fish, Chuck -- I'm really shocked I haven't dropped the bowl or killed him.
Love when an oblivious Asian girl almost runs into me in the parking lot then I follow her home bc she lives in my complex.
"Sometimes good things fall apart so better things can fall together."
Join us at 6pm for the men's NCAA games!
Working on some extra credit for CRJ!
*hollers at antonela*!
Starting to gather assessment data on Emory's own instances of WordPress and Omeka. Surveying instructors and researchers.
i did
Oh, and you two have iP, right? Do you know of a good document scanner? I can't find real scanner cord!
The annual indicator that summer is right around the corner, is when you see the All Saints Fest signs go up.
YAY!!! Thanks Sam, hope you love it.
im coming for you... :)
MusicalStop.com The one stop shop for All Indie Artists! ! !
Oh I've broken so much crap today. This design I'm working on is going nowhere fast.
I was going to ask about your trip, now no need :-)
I seem to be having Twitter hiccups.
Don Kelly is my hero.
This reminds me to upgrade my FF when I get home. :)
Good thing I took a shower last night. I am way too lazy to take one right now.
i haven't officially "delivered" them yet, but they should all show up round about
because, idk. I'm not tired ^.^ why are yu up?
Throat is killin me, bit by bit.
With every bad experience comes a learning opportunity to better prepare you when the same situation comes back around. Live & learn.
Totally didn't realize it was about a tranny until it was too late.
Out and about with
Nice! Hope the rest of the week goes smoothly for you as well. PS. I signed up for a speed date :)
We are open today! And the sun is shining....great day for a smoothie! Try our Pina Colada Blast.
sorry, no giveaways for this event. guess it was pretty pop-ular!! : can u please get me two tickets?
Wisconsin Governor Walker Attacks Sex Ed
(BREAKING NEWS) Reports say the Angels have agreed to terms with Albert Pujols for 10 years $250 Million
#WhatIMissMost is a job.
A rich, crazy person would do it unfortunely. You would be surprised what certain folks would do nowadays.
Couples jeggings! Brilliant!
Just got nicest message from an old friend in support of nat. library week. Proud to be assoc w/ libraries & supporting community learning
I Want To Win peoples hearts to not get any hate towards me :( i am very hated Idk y :(
Watching Joseph at #actorsplayhouse. Great show! Go La!
I want tonight to be one of those nights I ain't qne remember #fckked up
RT : Left my old bitch at home got a new one
I Swear My Mother Is Beautiful She Ion't Look 40 !!.
shout out to 4 shooting the bird! Lol
Home with a headache
Are you ready for some Football!!!! Redskins and Cowboys tonight!!!
Tyga - Faded feat Lil Wayne: via
Such a beautiful day out and TGIF! Come kickoff your weekend at the bar and try some of our new craft beers for Happy Hour!
Reading that Ty Isaac is all USC. "Whatever. Deveon Smith is much better. Heard Hoke cooled on Isaac"
damn that is hot. I'd still take it though. Don't mind the heat
LOL! Lets talk about your visit to LA. We should make a photo shoot happen :)
Thanks Jordan, please ask friends to vote from all devices and browsers!
let's hang out right now!
send me beats fam
27 Million trees a year are destroyed to support our paper towel addiction. Clean up your spills with cotton kitchen towels or old clothes.
in house booty....forever and ever and ever and ever!! Outside of that, I don't know.
Sometimes I carry a large butcher knife, just in case
Why is Stacy Keibler on #GeorgeLopez? More importantly, why am I watching #GeorgeLopez?
Once upon a time, twitter stopped working on my phone. Now it's swift.
My moms so annoying!
Oh no!! Hope you'll get better soon, dearest. :( Hugs
Happy Mother's Day !!!!
As a child my family's menu consisted of two choices: take it or leave it.
Bullies with paralysis have no feelings.
What was your most embarrassing moment on stage?:)
I'm excited for the new #APStyleBook also!
Hey who's the homeless guy they replaced you with on Sirius Radio (John)? You know he like !
i am going to dream in XML tonight. ugh.
The #Oscars are this Sunday night. Use #BestDressed to tell ABC's Red Carpet host who you think looks best. Follow Nina Garcia!
Jean Shinoda Bolen tonight at #womenofwisdom :: blessed with 2nd half of life, make meaning, have fun, choose
And the rep just put me on hold and hung up on me after I asked to be transferred to a manager
Do they still make great pizza?
Someone favorited my tweet from 62 days ago o_O
knowledge is power!
fitting Kaka and Ronaldo both get blocked. What were those price tags again?
It just occurred to me that the only real reason I came home was to use the bathroom. Do you do this? Is this silly or smart?
126 square blocks
My LA people, what's going on for cinco de mayo?!?! Got the day off!
RT : Win Tickets to Earth, Wind & Fire ! RT I want to see the Music Legends Earth, Wind & Fire! Winner will be chosen today!
“: I love launch days. My Twitter stream lights up with #space goodness. #Soyuz #TMA04M #NASATweetup #NASASocial”Cosign rt
I had to go look. I lost a day. Wow Where did Thursday go.
My heart just got an extremely sour feeling
Because taxpayers aren't entitled to public services/spaces they can actually use & because there's an app for that!
Well now I want to try it. I'll have to get on that.
Commissioner Sauron ruling with an iron fist - suspensions galore for the Saints are hard core.
Got 4 out of 10 pictures for a 10 page Spanish story due by Monday. Dece.
Grande Noelia!!!!!keep going then Miami is waiting for u!!!!!!!!!!!!
lmfao only with him! Aww you guys are cute 
$5 off your next order when you say you saw us on Twitter! Log onto www.lonestardeliveryonline.com or call us @ 877-527-5737
Please come to San Diego, and we will party together again! Miss you so!
Going in again at Barcito.
thanks, love! :)
I am so stoked for #TheVoiceFinale tonight! Tony Lucca is from my hometown buut I gotta goo al the waay. :)
Thanks Sis! I can't wait to see your film - I know it's going to be epic!
These old school Kings jerseys are pretty sick.
“: Dudes that have a "I dont have nothing prove attitude" with their shit together is very attractive”ain't we tho!
“Travel is more than the seeing of sights; it is a change that goes on, deep and permanent, in the ideas of living.” – Miriam Beard
Rape a pregnant bitch, tell my friends I had a three some.
fun :D
Thank you for replying. :) Joking about the sister thing... kinda sorta. ha ha!
Love to help with Let's meet!
i do that a lot actually. people usually tell me i'm weird for that, but glad i'm not alone :)
All right, I'm in with Visual Studio Achievements
#Imsinglebecause no one likes me :)
Apple IPAD is a joke...no camera, no multiple programs running. Large format Iphone? IDUD? Get a $999 Macbook for just MORE!
Turnover. Laker ball!
All of us here at Penn Fixture would like to wish all of you a safe and happy Turkey day!
Yeah. Can't have the little woman driving to the station at all hours. Especially with the baby.
@#ib8 Proud of my daughter, Sadie, talking about non verbal facial expressions of the 7th grade at Ignite#8! Thanks to
oh no!
No Sh#t Sherlock! Nice empty slogan, but I bet he doesn't have a clue how to make it happen!
same so you txt me 9526083
Most of the time when you settle, you tend to regret it later....
Hi Everyone, make sure to check your settings and time in your DVRs to ensure they are updated with the Daylight Savings Time!!
definitely pass interferance if i ever saw it!!
It's funny how so many guys/girls wished they had something real you got it but don't appreciate it!
Now that's dedication. Give us your top five and we promise no one will hold it against you.
Tonight's episode feat. Exec. Chef Michael Farrell of & BISTREAUX at the , who will talk about FQ Wine Fest.
Go big blue!! Glad I got to go to the game and really glad we pulled that one out despite the horrible officiating!!
Made a new list for myself late last night. Things I could achieve that wouldnt be settling. Jobs dreams. A TT job wasnt on the list.
The funny thing about political jokes is that they often get elected.
Missing my hubby...
Boycott the NBA for having a lockout RT If the lockout ends today you are going to ________
Rondo had the triple double (13, 12 & 17) but KG was the man on the night for BOS w/ 29 & 11 as take a 1-0 lead w/ the 92-91 win."
Or tweet us your question!
Not at all, but Dr. B told me this past weekend they could use some pointers. They are a colony after all!
Way to celebrate! Hope it was happy!RT : Wondering if I should walk up to dunkin donuts this morning & get donuts for my birthday.
M.O.B
graduation tomorrow?! what?! this is SO crazy! =0...time sure flies when you least expect it!
Promote yourself free on the site on my profile. All social networks. Follow 4 follow? i'll follow back in 1-2 days.
In a world full of darkness, shine anyway.
Lane Kiffin was at Tenn one year I believe
Stop and think to yourself, "Is this really bad customer service, or are these bad customers?"
hi sexy mommies - some lucky kids you have xoxo wishing you endless love <3
Gonna Light Up Some Fireworks and Fire Crackers Soon ;D
My sweet nephew died unexpectedly today. :(
thanks, I'll be here all week
Repetitive use injury: Dysfunction is there long before pain sets in, then as the dysfunction is corrected the pain diminishes.
Worried about missing the State of the Union so you can get your trivia fix? Don't. We're moving trivia to 7 so you can get your Obama on
☼ Success is dependent upon the glands - sweat glands. Zig Ziglar
what's good ..Thanks for the follow
Having those weird-ass conversations with your friends and thinking if anyone heard us right now, we'd be put in a mental hospital.
Two drivers tonight recommended Sabri Nihari for Pakistani / Indian. Moroccan recommends Andalous.
send me an email and I will followup directly. Tom
Just getting home from long day at work & gym..bout to run to the shower
left both cell phones at home and dressed for massive storms
agreed. We better score 40. D looks lost. Venables has to be hoarse...
Sonny Rollins honored on CBS: Kennedy Centers Honors! Jazz on network television. That's real "reality" television!
Gonna be a long day
I just got pregnant lookin at that picture! Dang u! Lol
Bruno Mars is the only short man I could ever love... O, and Bruce Lee.
I'm so embarrassed to think about any of those baseball team names. May as well call them Bad News Bats!
okay well that's not too bad xD
Ok brotha thanks!!!
Ok, am I crazy but anti depressant ads seem curiously similar to life insurance ads...
It doesn't get any better than today's New York Post cover.
Ok I met you at the Greyson chance concert right?
on a positive note, i did just learn how to send a fax from Outlook :)
want to buy from this fabric store up the street n make my own clothes but would look like some Gordon Gartrel
We will be announcing a *secret show* in Austin, TX soon!! :)
Plans are going into motion now for the Urban Noise Spring festival... send us your band suggestions!
Do tell...
Hi everyone, Nate here, your friendly Health IT geek! Sounds like an exciting chat!
A turkey never voted for an early Christmas - Irish Proverb
Gonna be a cold wintery night people! Bundle up!
nothing is certain outside of yourself.
And they're all coughing uncontrollably
Houston or Austin is like home of the Asians in Texas.
Our hosting provider is having some problems this morning, but we should be back up shortly. I'm sorry for the inconvenience!
pity you :P hehehehe
have you broken it down to minutes? Ha!
Twitter, im so excited to play my show.
Really really need new running shoes!
hmm... I sent you some stuff away back, I will resend. I have not heard from him.
hahaha! I heard its a wild and crazy party! :)
Its amazing to me how many people have no common sense...
Not the ideal day to think solar but still State #incentives kick-start Bellingham #solar panel company | BBJ Today
I'm calling bullshit. You weren't by Lakeshore dorms...You was here. And you was smoochin' with my brother
Thanks, it was!
thanx. You have a great week also.
School is Like A Boner , its Long And Hard , Unless Your Asian . (x
There is a show called "Hardcore Pawn"
As a teenager you are at the last stage in your life when you will be happy to hear that the phone is for you. Fran Lebowitz
you should tape a copy of Binds of Blood to *their* front door... (not sure I got the title right)
Miami Heat beating the Bulls Ass... #literally....on the floor
5'10"+ FEMALE PROMO MODELS NEEDED: national publication & food brand have teamed up for unique SXSW event on 3/15. msg me for details.
No, it's capitalism alright. Just fascist tinged capitalism.
I feel strange that I'm going tomorrow for The first game post-Beane. Just by chance
how you been
Sending our verry own danni a dark purple :) it seems to be all the rage :) Love from Harley
Some ideas sound ridiculous only when you speak them out.
Hello rain!!! Gotta love the free car wash!
Oh I was watching that. Then I watched it again.
like the new picture! it's meat boy. er something.
Mall later &getting my nails/eyebrows done! :)
hehe I love when someone sings nasty to me... ;-)
Do I have your email?
And if you've been wondering about these tweets, join the best sports biz chat on Twitter at #sbchat every Sunday at 9:30 pm ET.
I'm watching the game, DVRing HIMYM, if that's a reference to tonight's episode.
missing u too baby, and no roots
it should! They get tough!
Twisted and no doubt drinking vodka, hanging her ankles in hoop earring during sex
I bet me and could def make a better show
working too hard? ;)
RT Susan Hutchison = fundamentalist anti-evolution conservakook. Explains why she won't debate r explain her opinions on anything
eat lots of pasta - always works for me :-) - have a great day!
I have to laugh - of *course* you've done this before. My dreams can't even outdo the kitchen!
to jaden! Follow me! Ur awesome :)
i think its at the same spot we went to March Madness
Go #Reds!! Just watched a Reds feature on #MLBisBack on #ESPN...Cincy is where it's at! We love this city and it's great people!
What's your personal vision?
My mommy and her boyfriend working on the back yard .... I put in my request for a new room lol
Big Rangers win now 3 up on the pens with the Islanders beating down the pens!!
Thanks for the retweet
Watching 16 & pregnant i <3 this show even if the girls have no clue wat they got themselves into lol That sucks!!!
Thanks! I suppose I could have taken minute to look for that.
I'm going to be highly disappointed if this episode turns out to be lame, we wanna see Cody swear & rage! I hope it turns out as he said.
Worst officiated game I've ever seen
When I went to work today, I didn't expect to end up in jail. Just doing an interview with , but still.
Great pic! We love your work.
I azked god to get rid of my enemies I was Surprized wen I Lozt niggaz dat waz friends to me SMH #shout out to all my real niggaz
A true tragedy in every sense: London's Sky News reporting singer Amy Winehouse found dead in her London home. Details to come.
One Directions starts on their second album tomorrow!
Authors, cont.: If I can't find you easily I often just give up. How many opportunities for PR are you missing w/out a blog?
Nothing in this world that's worth having comes easy.
#MyPastRelationships made me know what I want and need in a relationship!
#thetransformationdare Day 1 - convo about what effective & engaging learning looks like to tchr; how do we know students are learning?
RT: If u love a man ull toast his pb&j
Stupid move Rondo. Try to act like you've been in a high stakes game before.
wow...is that who it was tho?
hope you die
Taking my son to see Jeff Tweedy perform at The Vic this weekend. Very excited! It will be his first indoor concert. Good start.
Whelp traffic in NYC
Asking a working writer what he thinks about critics is like asking a lamppost how it feels about dogs.
What a great day in NOLA! Be safe, be happy and enjoy your Mardi Gras!
hey. Sounds like fun, how's LA?
did you follow ?
Enjoy every scented moment with a Mia Joy Spa & Moisturizing Candle.
Were never taking a WR high, what was I thinking.
Nd It Begins NOW
me too!!
RT : The great use of life is to spend it for something that will outlast it. - William James
Excited! new album "Fearless" is going to be awesome! RT : A HUGE day tomorrow for our friend
I can't keep pretending I don't like you.
What makes you beautiful- One Direction
Today was fun with Brenda :D But tomorrow shuld be better with my Boo <3
Watchin Step Up 3 for the first time! One of my fav' gurl dancers also rep for NIKE is fucking amazing in it!
Who's ready for the CHILI CHALLENGE Tomm ??? I hear the winner gets an Amazing prize ?? (:
Love never fails you.
same here might order it tonight or tomorrow cause will have to get it on brads card hehe x
what a story - glad you are sharing your optimism!!
SF for a month in a few days. Sweet.
CHECK OUT OUR FAVORITES (:
Makes sense RT : twitter wrkd well for food truck event, b/c that is how ppl follow food trucks in Dallas.
You ain't say a place or time. You just gave a date and cause...
Also, good resources or books for principles of game design and development (creative, technical, and business perspectives all welcome).
Wow - big blue sky, blue field, blue suits, blue crowd. Now let's see some Orange and Black Attack - #GoBeavs!
Am I the last person on earth over age 30 to watch #thekingsspeech? What took me so long?
RT : I NEVER LIE ABOUT THE THINGS I HAVE ... I WORK HARD. AND IF I REALLY WANT SOMETHING ILL BUST MY ASS FOR IT.
gabe wants to know. Post it on his facebookwall
Enjoy nightime pillow talk with your mate
“: Searching for a salon out there that does hair chalking.” what is hair chalking?
Thanks for listening Andrie!
oh girl
Glad to hear they enjoyed it. Thanks for bringing them in!
Drinking with my white boys
Let's go puppies!
on the nights I have to work, I don't do any
lol im sorry for caring damn !
High levels of physical activity reduce cancer mortality rates by 38%.
“: Wow. This show has jumped the shark with all wheels spinning.” is this when a certain wife drives after her riteous cop hubby?
and this week, it'll be in the mid-70's! It might as well be spring
This year flew by. Happy New Year!
#you #don't #need #a #hashtag #for #every #word #you #type. It's
My own cat doesn't want to cuddle with me. get the fuck outta my room
I shall drink until I dance with a leprechaun :3
If you don't use the Oxford Comma you are wrong, lazy, or British.
yes mam baby
figure out I have bad hand writing tonight. I guess my way of writing far looks like I spell car.
Good thing you cleared that up. My policy is… I stop following people if they’ve been dead more than three days. LOL
Had such a great meeting with Steven on Feb 28 that I've decided to help as best I can. GL on BuyingIntoBmoreWest campaign!
Yes you can indeed. Good to have you back in the running!
VALENTINE'S DAY IS AROUND THE CORNER!! Place your orders now!
Well thank you :) We've actually toured to Michigan before! We are from Minneapolis so I'm sure we'll be back!!! :)
Fuck this phone.
After all, the dealer did invest millions to sell and service automobiles
Looking for motivation to get me to the gym....
Just tried QuestionPoint (virtual reference) for the first time via askmn.org. Very cool!!
RT : Mary Marshall Clark via video from to #oralhistory conference: how do we teach 9/11 history now?
;) handgun Close Quarters Combat In Airsoft
My 3 yr old just asked me if David apologized to Goliath after hitting him in the head with a rock. How do I explain that one?
Oh, yeah. That's actually pretty funny in a Talker-headed way.
Flying to Oakland today; arriving at sundown. Auspicious!
it's not the first time
More than 9.
Just left the mall. :) are you going to the vs game tonight? Would love to see you after My performance.
I cannot believe that the purpose of life is to be happy
#NeverTrustAGuyWho wants a sex change.
All I got left is a 30 second acting scene
The show is progressing so fast, the moment is almost here. Will you be there to share? March 25th www.MRCJE.com get your tickets..
She's gonna be loads of fun by wedding time. Loads.
I have a frosty beverage that says Blueshirts over your Devils
Just stole a paper clip from Hope that wasn't important.
haha what's up?
I smell shit
really craving some taco bell! idk even know why-_-
Sounds like a metrowide ambulance shortage with all the car crashes.
China is a big country, inhabited by many Chinese. ~ Charles De Gaulle
Just me and an old guy in this bar right now, watching beastie boys videos. He can't get over how good the vids are, never seen them before.
It's almost time to walk
i like the boys better anyways :) besides
Nice profile photo. I'd date you.
i love jeezy..$waiting
I've heard excellent things about Jimmy's at Foster & Lincoln. Thoughts?
Within several hours of PP sending email about Komen cut, they didn't know what to expect. People donated, and wanted to do more
why don't you allow users to upload photos for contacts and manually add FB/Twitter URLs?
That bad?
Another apology from David Letterman - there's talk he may be punished. Do you think he should be disciplined by the network? Let us know...
Giving thanks to our Creator for universal #love that cultures our palettes ~ palates with hues of rhythm blues clues...
Two patches to core committed this morning, including one that isn't CSS at all. I like today :)
Definitely Does a fun headline game, total foodie, follows everything, knows all.
Just one hour away from Thanksgiving Live on !
#1B1S1B RT : "Next Friday come, I don't have the rent; and out the door I went"
I'm so St. Louis just ask my tattooist..... MVC Tourney... Legggooo
can rub some good luck on me! I hate foot cramps
hopefully once this summer... Justdunno when yet!
I'm betting that Blackburn will win. I'm sitting on a #L15. Use this information as you wish.
that would be clutch bro, sorry i havent checked my twitter in a while homie but yea keep working with
Damn they really are. Also that gold eye stuff is really not doing her any favors.
Enjoying lunch with the fam at Mah Jong. Great food!
I haven't watched current season yet, but I loved season 1.
But...I have a good guy here. So, i'll stay. (:
RT #Free Twilight in the Park concert. Tonight 145th Street Band - high-energy blues. 6:15pm. Organ Pavilion.
Thought for the Day: "Industry is the parent of success." - Spanish Proverb
Nice. Nowhere to go but up!!
something like that!! Pretty ridiculous. But nothing comes between me and my #towsondiner choc milk. Nothing!!
The Library is closed today in observance of President's Day
donation!? Woman I got some extra candles you can have as a donation...other than that, I got nothing lol...
Anybody else love the #internetexplorer song
Starting to look at new types of sources is always fun because you find new types of information.
I wanna get sloppy drunk but I can't even
it's his photography !Back at ya! U r so sweet...looking forward to seeing u on 5th. Heading to tweetup now.
Apparently I've hit the follow wall, looks like it's time to do some cleanup
I need to get on my Twitter game. There are days when I am all over it and then I go away for weeks.
u better!!!
is telling me about the laws for owning erotic animals...weird
Going out to the clothesline.........need a break from this desk.
boys used to diss me, now they write letters cuz miss me
#BOYFRIENDvideo IS AMAZING GO AND LOOK THE VIEWS WOW!!!!!! :) <333
Er...chattr, not chatter.
it's not funny!
Kitty ripped key off of laptop. I was able to repair it. I feel useful now. SKILLZ!
Richard Wallace who works at a small business in LeRoy tells us how the conversion disorder has slowed down the local business.
Coming back from picking up my son from Arcadia & a Sheriff gets behind me. Follows me 4 a mile. I'm legit tho. So he did nothing! GOOD GOD!
it sucks :/ well they are gonna lose to the thunder anyway
*hugs back* I think I'm gonna crawl into bed now. I'm actually sleepy now. lol ttyl~
to be fair, on that last one, the compuserve line was 's
Crap, been listening to a lot of Duck lately. I wonder how many of his bass lines, if any, had been sampled by the beasties?
Will be going to turkey real soon anyone ever been up there any fine ass chicks over there
My room is so messy atm it disgusts me. Cleaning it now. Oh and it's raining again so now I can't go running... :(
Pass=check ;D
is this the prequel to Hunger Games?
Chillin with tha boys...there the only people to listen to
There is nothing more disturbing to me than realizing in the middle of the night exactly how much work I have left to do....
Can't wait to play #TheShow12 tonight!
just say "thank you" to those who dis you, because they are just motivating you to be even more amazing than u already are!! <3
about us & join us Friday, April 13, starting 6pm @ Legacy Church, as we Celebrate 40 Years Of Service To Our Lord Jesus!
I thought fluoridated drinking water was the norm throughout the U. S.
maybe you would like me :)
Marina abromovic 'silence is golden' party tonight at #sundance. Good thing im trained,
The new guy at work just told me he thought I was 40. *instantly ages like the dude from Last Crusade*
I have a summer bucket list. :)
Good-morning world •• wishing everyone a blessed, enjoyable, & productive day! Thanking the 1 above 4 waking me and my family 2 another day
I feel all warm and fuzzy for Stamkos now
S/O to Roxy Longhairdontcare Cartwright!! She from Delaware and holding it down for TFPG!!! SALUTE!!!
viva roy cropper ;-)
Game time!
Fixed dashboard while was swimming.
& angela is their sister
Group 8, Public Spaces: manifesting social media (tweets, etc) in public space (murals, holograms, etc.)
Where are you skiing?
Being a girl is not about wearing clothes, it's about playing dress up, no matter your age. :)
#smbmad #uwsocial see - there are lots of similarities between burgers and higher learning
Gettin pumped for this Wed. night. Show starts at 8:30 p.m. Come get down like a clown!
just watch tape, all you doubters real. His story is a great inspiration to youth as well!!
Had an awesome time today assisting with magazine shoot! Super dope.
Alright ill spread the word!
Was pleasantly surprised by Death Race 2...But who the fuck brings grenades to a bank robbery? Thats just asking for something bad to happen
Truth Is Everything Is Everything, Nothing Is As It Was, and Very Little Is What It Seems
Thanks for the beautiful shout-out. Keep the music and beats alive, poet warrior!
Paisans had good deals, love brocach too
great job at the event last night, hope you enjoyed the food!
A well known fact: #Rupert Murdoch 'Not A Fit Person' To Run Major Company- Phone Hacking Report.
- just came across and wanted to say hello!
This coming Saturday 7/23 the Four Freshman will be performing at the Sitnik Theatre Lackland Performing Arts Center in Hacketstown, NJ
thanks for the livestream! (Though still problems.) Do you know when he will go on? What are the attorneys discussing now?
Looking forward to tomorrow :)
me to... lets go spend our money lol
Another blessed day!
So u love norwegian girls? ;; Well, then you love me <3
I know where I want to be in life and I know the type of person I want to share my life with.
u from there?
SDG&E LED Holiday Light Exchange Brings Energy Savings to Balboa Park, Chula ... - MarketWatch (press release) SDG&E LED Holiday Ligh
Manners. .MF. do you have those?
Also Welcome new followers
I need driver anger management
Ready for valentines day! wonder who my first kiss will be?
happy birthday jb i love you<3
Lesson: check the lawn h2o schedules at local parks. Just wen for late night walk with dog and ran into a wall of water. ops.
#resume #tips Be careful of job scams on Craigslist and other places that offer jobs without an interview..
At the mid-point of the PanAm Games, I hear that Canada is in third position in terms of medals, Can anyone confirm? News is so sparse.
Feherty's show right on
kinda wish I had a chilled camel-back suspended from my ceiling for certain parched mornings. that would be swish.
NYC is the place to be (:
I'm sure we'll learn a lot more in the next few days about what's REALLY going on.
I'm going easy at the gym...don't want to knock a potential baby out ;) lol.
bo well we can go ill put yu to sleep Fuck a bad bitch right now
I know it's going to be cute b/c the fabric is great. I'll read the post - always. :)
Happy Veterans Day. Thank you to all those who have fought for our country and freedoms. You are appreciated.
The gunfire in this movie is the funniest thing I've ever seen. There's no kickback and they wave the guns around without bothering to aim.
Hope your move to SF went well! For fun, try Hangar One in Alameda. Great tour! We just explored Great Lakes beer, here in OH.
Well done sir.
I stand alone. Not behind a teammate. Not with someone else to blame for my failures. For in my sport all my success is up to me.
iWillPark couldn't be more excited for the ! Even if parking at Candlestick is a headache, the success makes it well worth it!
RT : It happens. I always jump around to another script if that happens. But they say that's looked down upon
trying to be more selective with my moves.... looks like things are paying off
MAMBA ALMOST READY!!!!
“: Trying to make this 8AM flight. So far, we've only lost one shoe” we think it's your shoe not little will
YES @ AMINA'S LAST TWEET.
Thanks again to everyone who came out and supported our Taste A Thon Fundraiser! Friend us on facebook and tag yourselves in pictures!
Biked to work on this gorgeous Friday. I'm so excited for ArtScape this evening and all weekend long!
“: fix me dinner too?” surely
did you shed the tears? :)
Also Eric is going to be joining me. So YAY! - YAY back. Are you preparing him for the clan?
It's so funny, no one in this band really listens to "metalcore" anymore lol.
Today was fucking great. Now off to my wonderful fucking job.
I I disagree
Come to the #UNM SUB lower level to see #Verizon between 10:00 and 2:00pm today for free stuff.
fuc ya RO!! Can't wait!?
On my way to Indianapolis! Did you know it has a canal?
All my money's going down the drain :(
Definitely. I think they started review applications on 11/15. Eager to see what happens.
no child nanas home bored as shit getting high off my own supply...on a gangsta lean blowing on some blue dream...
Yeah, what Veronica said.
Great vibes!
hey! Thank you :) checked out a couple of your songs ..love the one to your son. Keep up the good work!
Feeling extra good this morning.
If youre a mall-going couple, misters stay right next to your misses. Don't make everyone walk around you or awkwardly between you.
sure u will !! Lol yes u don't have to be worried but u would never distract me!! ;)
However, my laptop is about to die and I'm afraid to plug it in and use it. Soon, I'll be off.
would Kobe celebrate after losing game 7 of a NBA Finals like the Patriots did?
Plus, a seating-plus-shelving system, a minimalist bike mount, and more in this week's issue
Is it correct to say "over exaggerate" isn't the "over" implied in exaggerate
I think it's interesting. But I might be biased :)
thinking about Ms. Joly
1/4/12:Today's Pink Slip Topic is based on a favorite quote from the book "The doors we open and close each day decide the lives we live"
omg I know! I went to bed at 3 and got up at 7 ahahaha #nosleep I know what I'm doing when I get home defiantly taking a nap!
Getting business cards made up. Where do you suggest I get them?
right here
coit tower! It has an amazing view of the city. & the Irish bank had some really good food.
DON'T MISS OUT on this week's special. 25% OFF PROTEIN SUPPLEMENTS!
That is so amazingly sweet
Success is doing ordinary things extraordinarily well.
Q1 Aww, "dress the part"? Really? :/ (You're right. But I *love* wearing jeans and fuzzy shirts!)
yayayaay last day of school tomorrow for four days :D
Bulldogs convert late in the PP. Leblanc ties it at 2 for the
“: goodmorning sir hows life treating you”I'm good. Hope all is well with u!
good evening to all!!`
“You know you've read a good book when you turn the last page and feel a little as if you have lost a friend.” P Sweeney...
Happy Thanksgiving! Be polite and try everything on the table.
Dear young moms, Your kids are excited about Santa. Introduce them to St. Nicholas. He was excited about Jesus - the real gift giver!
Default Picture by T-Pain
Austin-"hey i just met you and this is crazy! but heres my number...so call me maybe!" me-"I DONT HAVE IT YET! D'="
Happy birthday dude!
A bx of dates to promote a dating service, is it for seniors? btw brunette galadarling rules.
I get in for free right ? Lol cause I'm official ciroc girl ! ahaha
Looks like SLEEPLESS NIGHT, one of my favorite films from Fantastic Fest last year, is opening this upcoming weekend!
Louis hit 3 million!!! Now Liam's turn!!
my point of reference is proverbs 31 :) to me, marriage is a sleepover with ur best friend every night!
Left Neglected and Still Alice = my two favorite books of late.
#terriblemixcd all the #tigers walk up / at bat songs
cool you jet skies and
he's following me I think m delaney btw
Bo RT : I'm so sick of Cleveland and seeing the same shit.
Yep had too..ha
A day I will remember for a while. Sad, challenging and so much more. And Cinco de Mayo had nothing to do with it.
Apartment fire in South Austin at Tramor at Oak Run Apartments.
Anyone headed to the polls today?
Weve been told that he is a great baby so no complaints but sleepy doesn't even begin to explain it + accepted offer on house :)
"Warn them the next info is incorrect." - Shawn Lawrence Otto
Clearly, greatness.
- Have you seen our organic line of products? 2 polos and 1 jacket.
I loved your Hawkman run.
im bored. someone
your bio seems like something out of a TOK book.
FOLLOW THEY FOLLOW BACK GO GO GO!!
#MSC - thx setting up. is motivated and focused on #eCylinder and #Medeco. Should be a great year!
Yes, sir :) It's what I've been up too. www.facebook.com/INCGivingProject Launching in Australia next week to!
So glad you liked it! Good luck with yours!
we just wrote a hit record!!!!!! this shits crazy
Tryna Get To Richton Park This Weekend.
You got it!
Bad hair day :(
Stay where you are. I will send people to help. :-p
What am I doing this morning? Taking photos at a fencing tournament!
RT : They're here! Here Come the Mummies are live (er, dead) in the studio right now.
i didn't watch Austin's ustream today :( how was it?
Wit is educated insolence. -Aristotle
i want Gerard Butler SO
#MissAmerica ballet dancers... Loved Black Swan!
This Monday, November 22, we will be posting our new song "BOUT TO GET ON IT"!!! Get ready!!!
thanks mama!
Hope you all enjoyed your #CincoDeMayo in #KAFECASTRO style! CHEERS! *clink*
good cause they come in packs of 3 for $3 lol j/k
bold pick. I like it. Good for you. I unfortunately have to be lame and go Heat.
- great to see you too, glad you could make it out on our one 'drinking night'
nice blog, do you do hair? or do you collaborate with a hairdresser? we Lurve doing wedding hair, would do it everyday!
Do you think Pekovic is the real deal? He got 33 minutes tonight....
Is the bubble tea maker up and running? RT : look is on twitter! Lets go get some Bubble Tea!
": I wanna sleep but can't" stay up with me!!!
I GOT A HUG TODAY. I can go back to bed, today has officially been won.
That's always good I can't wait to start my internship with fox ": I do! I am truly blessed to have a job I love. "
RT "Client needs are simple: Clients need Ideas, Innovation and (real time) Intelligence to power sales." via
One has to ask why Illinois cares so poorly for its substance abuse treatment providers.
Kevin Garnett speaks his mind #thatisall . I'm not saying nothing else, he might curse me out! lol
Of course (: Thank you. (:
Up and at 'em for and ! Ms. Zajick already here to warm up! People already camping and setting up shop
That's what I'm here for !! U know ill call u doing the same.. I love you Mick!!!! Everything will be fine :)
yeah I am prepare for house guests this weekend and you know how that goes
That's awesome! What are your favorite stories to tell?
Just beasted that african art midterm!! WHOA!!! I feel an A coming my way :-)
n thanks for da follow back all smiles wita big ass smile gtta smoke a few loud sticks on dat
very cool! see you guys tonight!
I watched that yesterday and again today
ha ha right on
it was done inline on a web...came off finshed and had die-cutting, spot gluing and folding...quite elaborate
Tickets purchased, we will be in Seattle for pretty much all of June. let's have lunch! :)
good morning twitters
sounds like it would be Trevor Crowe
eat breakfast first!! *the voice.
and lo did the heavens rumble and the mountains quake as the red pen slashed and tore.
by the color they made his skin look, its
#ThingsBetterThanTheMiamiHeat Pat Riley's hair Gel
get the name right, dumbass! OSAMA!! NOT OBAMA!!!
Why is it so in to dye chunks of your hair with extreme colors?
Forget the Google issue. The FTC website is absolutely full of their own content - seriously - we need and investigation!!
i do have..but been so busy.. Forgot to charge... Hehe.
Thanks for RTing! I hope the weather's nice next weekend.
well igotta get back on my shit #work #school #basketball gotta balance dem out
weidman, Bisping, & Evans Are Going To Win Today
Well Consensus fades hit again and now at 18-7-1 last 26 after the Heat consensus goes down. and all FREE
survey of instns found <1/3 of #highered community dev and econ dev offices coord. for holistic view of impact.
The Kentucky Derby feels like the superbowl of horse racing.
Miss You;)
Being called ugly <<<<
My Mom's doing well-struggling a bit since the operation. It's been tough. Thanks for asking! It's hard for me to talk about.
Masha from the party
watching the sunrise on my Born Day....possibilities feel INFINITE!
Exactly RT That's Helton's seventh walkoff HR...First since 2009...But most jacked I've seen him since shot off Saito in Sept. 07
Never thought I'd desire a product called Ladder Golf, but there it is: Ladder Golf. Want.
- what about a double header of both movies together...long day at the movies!!!
AND A WOODCHIPPER!
Pretty nice day overall here in Michigan, but most definitely jealous of all you festers!
How we perceive life directly impacts how we live it.
They look great!
Thanks, Bruce. Hope you're well. Weathered the storm I see.
Hi Ryan, if you want to support The Nature Conservancy this holiday season, you can! With the pungle.me app. Check it out.
Just got my copy of Why We Broke Up by Daniel Handler. Only forty pages in but I love it already.
Challenging run on the beach- so much wind today. I powered through; resistence makes me push harder and grow stronger. I will not give up!
ayy ladies thats my song bring it back yeah that to
PA twitters go don't forget to
I'm pretty sure I got school in August .
ringringring! Hell? Oh Hi Tamara! Thanks so much for following!! Talk sooN!
Good morning, we are at the NWFA wood floor expo in Orlando Fl- Stop by our booth 736.
Good evening, Ms. Deb. My evening? Good. Did you have a good day?
Challenge: Use a song title (past or present) to describe your current love life.
Hi Tara. We actually have a beer making class tonight but it is full. Next one is Feb. 15. You can sign up online. Cheers!
It's been a long week. Time to sit down and finish up some emails and get ready for youth soccer this weekend.
Awesome! Awesome Quote
Hope your having a GRAND morning. #VinnySwagg<3 (<----I made that up). Love ya(: I'm Such an #IconicIdiot lol(made that up 2)
really, Cali? Why would ya say that?
anyone having trouble finding a fresh ham?
I Really Really Really Love it I Even Recorded it on Ma TV just so I can see u EveryDay I Love you Trey.
Really -.- my whole life is starting to revolve around this ONE issue!
What is a free gift? Aren't all gifts free?
besides we suffered for about 13 years goes with out saying! Lol
From my dell laptop's connectivity challenges to charger malfunctions, I'm considering spiking my coffee...ugh!!
great :) because you scared me here for a few minutes! I come from a land of no tornadoes and extreme weather!
It's your life, live it the way you want to.
twitters been lame latley
RT! ": i have something to say but just dont know how?"
Robberies, daring escapes & the invention of chewing gum! Jackson County Visitors Bureau launches a new tour: (812) 774-9208 & enter 1-28 #
Microsoft Tests Out Mandatory Supplier Sustainability Reporting
#foodhubs are becoming key aggregation point for traditional distributors (so cool for producers!)
dont want the world to see me / cause I dont think that they'd understand / when everythings made to be broken / obama please dont bomb iran
WordCamp? There is one in Milwaukee too.
Need 10 to go and follow and for me! If you do, you get a shoutout to over 10k followers! #Retweet !
RT : Don't forget that the first payment of estimated taxes is due on April 17th.
I'M BACK BITCHEZZZZZZ
I wish it was 80 degrees all the time.
he could even go to cafe du monde and bring back a snack for the team and they wouldn't need to worry!
my memory did not fell me. Wanted Kyle to hit that
Welcoming Genealogist of all levels of experience to visit our site with free member ship. Http://www.myfreegenealogy.com
#WhatsObamaHiding his head up his arse
Cotto not cotton..
When your parents make you feel like a third wheel.. I'm talking to you and you just start up another convo with the other parent..
Land Rover Discovery 4 / LR4 Review (with Off Road) [HD ...
have arisen from the dead #backtothegrind after a week of the plague..going to be a busy one!
you're welcome =) <3
omg! Yes we were hungry! If u r ever in Atl, u should go thr. They hv a great menu n the prices r good.
it's like '09 in your basement and i'm in love with Nevy.
Ohh you know.. Just a little
BUT FOE' REALS FOLLOW ❤
Sorry to know you missed the event. Hope to see you at the restaurant soon :)
I hope that's never anything a She in my life says LOL
I will not be officially releasing it until end of May >> ": How do I get a copy of your new song #RunItLikeABoss ? :)”
seeing teachers in stores at 5am= awk
If only more people thought such a thing, I could consider getting off my prozac script.
I have!
Got a Charity? Let me know how I can help!
muahahaha you can't! (n)
That's how I feel! It's great to be happy when you're chunky!! Love your show masters!
I loved your reaction when you got flashed. It was priceless, A++
Found the perfect medium sized cupcake liner and a pan for them!!
I did it AGAIN. OMG MAKE IT STOP.
Listen here real girls putting a wig on your head with some real hair sticking out looks FAKE! Get that shit together
Enjoy a fantastic day!
could use some star power here, too: cut through $walker$ noise & #GOTV (ESP. #milwaukee)
i got this thing to write for but it's not coming easily. good thing i have 3 weeks.
heading out soon. Will be at Augusta this afternoon. Excited!
me and deniza are cuter!! And thanks for making my phone go off
Whaddup my man. We should create some music together really soon.
I swear, waiting to hear back about being booked for a show or not is the most stressful experience in life.
Some ppl on twitter are annoying
are in double OT!! Who's cheering for who now? My favorite is "exhaustion"
Mention this tweet and receive a complimentary calamari appetizer on us.
Need to get the paper. Thank you!RT : There's and in the newspaper this morning.
well thanks doll:) so is your face. <3
mom well when do u wanna drink some Crown royal 😜
thank you so much!! i'm so glad you enjoy them! organic sneak peek photos to come! :)
I'm in expo in back. Off center aisle at the end of row 1100 white coat.
Wow, thanks that was fantastic! Now, I have work to do!!
thanks for the #FF!
my favorite perfume is wonderstruck and paris amour
Happy 60th anniversary ! Thanks for being such an instrumental part of !
This is a brand new and exclusive FREE product and it's not available anywhere else! All you need to do right now to claim your FREE...
Excited to get my first tattoo.
“All great changes are preceded by chaos.” ~ Deepak Chopra
well to finish off tht last tweet of mine im not gonna let haterz other me cuz i know when they tlk about me they be hatin on my swag
Google "Up Emergency Powers Act 1933" if u like Jesse Jackson jr
I missed having a phone and the internets
Still amazed that the Seattle Public Library system has an iPhone app. I like living in the future. Thanks !
Fact: TYPEWRITER is the longest English word that can be made using only the letters on the top row of a computer keyboard.
Wondering if Yankess fans miss Joe Torre...
let me know :p
I'd spitball you but I can't find you.
Is that lady coming or going??
The gym is the only thing i have to look forward to anymore.
Fair point, but I don't think an honest desire to explore why certain art bothers you necessarily makes anyone a snob.
You bet. Now how do you land this crazy thing?
Please join him as well.
I kept laughing at that! The horns did not make him look scary at all!!!
SERIOUSLY FINNALLLY OUT OF WORK omg seemed like the longest time of my life.....
Shopping early tonight (prob Mozart's) at 6. Break for dinner at some point but trying to work till 12ish
Try not to rush into things
Today a gang of clowns are protesting NATO in Chicago armed with 1000 whipped cream pies.
sweet. I am trying to patent a combo tampon/maxi. I am perfecting the anchor shape as speak.
@ new BCBSM Jefferson collaboration center, Xbox kinect, tvs, darts, work out machines, so awesome.
Do you start drinking red wines when the weather turns cooler or are you a 12-month-a-year red lover?
Also, to our DJs - no general meeting today, but there will be one next week!
don't tweet too much zayn.....
Man.... I den hit some shit on the keybored now the screen all small.. smh
"we could be a farmer in these clothes."
Jesus why you such a bitch!?!?! I mean really?! Are you on your period?
Why the fuck am i still st work. i been in this bitch since 930am
Be ready...May 19 is Food Revolution Day..and Piccolo Chef is organizing a special event for all you kids out there. Stay tuned !!!...
Use our search function, it took our engineers a long time to build. Has metadata mapped correctly. #sparc_binfield :)
"we made this one in my garage" damn straight #foo fighters win best rock record!
Love me or hate me, both are in my favor. If you love me, I’ll always be in your heart. If you hate me, I’ll always be in your mind.
Well isn't that lovely dont think that stain will be coming out anytime soon(;
My sister sent a video to my mom..awkward
yes. Just don't watch at 9 during your favorite news :-)
you're street fruit.
Definitely! They're all we watch in our house, in addition to some Hulu.
I AM OFFICALLY CLASSIFYING TODAY AS FUNNY FRIDAY...I want to hear your funny stuff!
Shower and a beer = attitude adjustment.
See you at the workshop tonight!
Thanks for following me Kate....welcome to twitterville!!!
RT : "Jazz is not just music. It's the definition of the Afro-American black."- #NinaSimone I love Nina.
Thats kool.. I don't take FCAT until Wednesday bcuz everybody testing on different days
": How do you move a 3-million-pound building across New Orleans?//Ask Katrina.
All aboard. Heading to London for 's Social Commerce Summit w00t! 1st time back since moved away 1 year ago
Lisa Mitchell - Neapolitan Dream, oh yeah.
sleep… sleep sounds good
Thanks for the laugh. And it does.
Ha Ha… very true!
Any "exotic" people out there?
Quote of the day: "Love or Hate, You gotta respect them."
Crafting dark and angry these days. Many zombies.
Watching Martin
Love when Dallas loses! I wonder if that kicker has a job tomorrow??
Yeah,the Beach House is pretty good.I got the vinyl which came with a download card(nice touch)).I hate LP's w/o download.
ErWhere iGo,iGet "Hi's Nice TO Meet You".
I need to figure out what outfits I am wearing for my Senior Photos tomorrow!!
Pacers came to play. LETSGO!!!!!!
Home at last!
oh I know you are lol but things happen when you least expect it 😉 let me know how it goes! 😁
Have to start packing up my dorm, moving out on Thursday 😳
lib&archive group #aicwi -> is MLS nec? (depends) and what about training? (Mellon rep attanded to listen & museum cons progs with interest)
Amazing first day of production! Great footage of local sustainable Refugee farm and Culinary arts school.
cool. well done. I love the hashtag.
The are too cool to play inside the Grammys. It's so true.
Will there be a TriBeCa store anytime soon? Needed!
Oh my gosh Alex, he did AMAZING,he mentioned that you guys could be there so that means he was still thinking of you guys(:
Kerry Wood is a hot mess. Way to screw up Dempster's nice game. Kind of like Valverde did to Verlander.
hm? RT If a meteorologist tweets before 5 AM, does anyone read it?
you've got to be kidding. are there any fallen trees laying about that you could stretch across water?
I miss DobbyNami :(
Thomas LJ rules in RBS v. Highland Fin. Partners case concerning issues of construction of agreements in proposed CDO: [2010] EWCA Civ 809.
awesome masters finish. Best ive seen in years. Congrats
2,100 tweets now ....so there's that
I loved it :) its amazing!
RT : At CedarCreek Church in Perrysburg, OH for FCA Event. Please come out and say hello.
well i hope its not his baby
#Undeniable is some real shit
Pretty much anytime should be fine except Sunday night.
ahaha well then thanks (:
I thought I tweet a lot, but when I see people with thousands of tweet!! I am no where close...
Used doctor as reinforcer every 10 artic reps w preschooler today. Loving apps in tx this week!
Im not impressed by your status or your flashly boots. keep movin ..
oh, i am ready! strong hearts, we are coming to visit!
oh shit son! Ima kick yo ass! LmmfaO! HIT ME WIT THE DARE SHIRT AN FLAT TOP YOU AINT SHIT LOLOLOLOL FUCK YOU! LOVE YA!
Great turn out at the Austin PHP Meetup this past weekend! Thanks to everyone who showed up.
she had me dead when she was like why is your voice like that pinhead
HBD !God bless you
: "We live in a world where slime is disguised as sophistication." Hit the nail on the head.
When you lock your keys im your car
Using the 'high-tech' way - software. More portable than the bulletin board. But, I'm still not giving up my board!
Please pardon my timeline for the next hour. I am joining monthly chat. Join us to learn more.
Omg I need a mini lap giraffe so bad!!!! He
im bout to play my game .
Speedy recovery!
don't forget I have those 2 boxes we talked about
RT : Do you know of any great resources for adults with autism? I would like to add them to my next book. Thank You!
Oh thats cool! Did you hear that josh has stopped and left the stage.
what video
HAHAHAHAHAH thanks for the trophy i can't believe you gave me one for that :)
My grandma is missing. Anyone seen a black saab with an old angry hag in the drivers seat?
Michael Savage is insane, Mazdas are awesome, and sometimes Rally's gets it right.
Thanks have you entered the contest yet! :)
at Casino Arizona for lunch on our Anniversary then a movie. 3 years with my wonderfull wife.
Today 1832: The massacre at Bad Axe brought an end to the Black Hawk War. Black Hawk lost over 260 members, while the whites only lost 14.
vlingo is so cool
Don't think so. Can You re-send?
I hate when ppl talk about ppl and not doing good they self
Working on strategy.....WHAT's NEXT? Stay tuned...
I wish the A's would be allowed to move to San Jose. Then we wouldn't be talking about lance nix's future as a starter in Oakland.
I do that all the time Jason, even with regular words. <3
Ugh what a drag. Let me leave that workplace already and be where I wanna be
you my boy blue! If she uses a crayon to sign checks
#neverforget to tell your Momma you love her, even if it's completely random. She deserves to know sometimes!
I wonder what I'll be like as a mother? :)
Still waiting on contact info. Your is running out. I've asked you many times and I've received 3 ppls info. Don't care if you don't.
Hoops after school in the square gym today.
Did you buy a powerball ticket yet?
and overboard with Miley! I like it with Miley and Jessica.
just got the funniest teacher from a teacher saying my midterm grade isn't uplifting & i should think of ways to make it in my favor
I hope you were talking about the gross marshmallow chicks.\
It a shame to see a boys club team up 4 tds run a trick play to score .....smh!
I have that bookedmarked! but I don't give shit to
i hate you ucla institutional review board. you ruined my weekend and probably my chances of graduating on time. fuck you all the way.
Wait, Butler lost to Indiana? I guess their season's over.
i am now fuck off
RT - #dardardy s #cornbarrel ing bears never fail to get teabagged, but the #patriots are quite the opposite. new england di...
evidently North Carolina...;-)
miss you more <3
Enjoy!! I wish it were 60 degrees in NYC :)
When is the last time we had a Final Four OT?
going to reinvest my $7 mega winnings into a $2 quinella box at the track tomorrow. happy retirement here i come.
Kill me now.
is smiling at her haters! They just confirm how blessed she is!!! She and God are just tickled and entertained!
Big black nigga all that huffing & puffing
Today, was a good day.
when i can send texts but i can't receive them <<
#threewordstoliveby I. love. literature.
Hey road Cauldron, keep rocking it, we can hear you on the broadcast as loud as their supporters. (I dont expect the same in Portland) :)
that's unfortunate, but idk how to fix beds, so i can't help you .. sorry
how goes you? :) love the new pic. Is that your next album cover? ;)
I'm going to bedd! Happy Holidays :)! GoodNight <3!
45-55% of respondents read through the program book to re-engage with a performance after they went home!
hey. :) Just wanted to say Hi. And thanks for following me on Instagram.
KENTUCKY FINNA WHEN THIS SHIT BEFORE THE SECOND HALF
Anyone? RT : I've always wondered if there's a place where 'American' is considered a sexy foreign accent
stats are for losers “: Cam Newton is first QB in history.... ..... 6th QB to have back-to-back 400 yd games period.”...
I know u readingg this
Brilliant and right on target!
Tonight's #debate anybody wondering why and how #Romney's clip on health care didn't play. I suspect control room drama.
I Knew Mayweather Would Win.
Made it to Cambodia, got my first nights real sleep. Off to the orpahage tomorrow, visiting the Jesus Village in PP today! :)
With confusion on rally, will people like me bring the kids during dinnertime for a maybe? Doubtful, sadly.
Hello Missouri
Yay!!! Glad that you liked it!!
I should hope they are positive! I mean setting the bar and setting it high, thus stu rise to challenge
yes ma'am I love it!! Thank you!
A pair of red cat's eye clear glasses, Kate Spade NY canvas bag, Anthropologie planner, Hello Kitty pen. And etc!
Heard about the #WRECK in Wal-Marts parking lot last night in E-ton? Would love to know details, and if the girl is ok!
CANNOT WAIT FOR TEEN HOOT. <3 who else is going?
ABCNews doing smart tribute to Mike Wallace. Class act all around.
Did a hamster die on Strasburg chin in the Toyota commercials?
i will always love you and you got my vote
A homeless man just asked me for money to buy a grande skinny latte. Oh America...
if you follow me&retweet this, my life would be complete <3your amazing.. and i love friday, no matter what anyone says.
Broken people hurt other's b/c they don't know who they are, or don't know what they have. Let yourself be whole so you can heal, not hurt.
2 firetrucks & an ambulance. I hate knowing that something awful is happening to someone out there, especially on Mother's Day.
OMG! And they have vegan doughnuts!
yum RT RT : SD Restaurant Week website: New arkSD menus uploaded every min www.SanDiegoRestaurantWeek.com
follow us?
Tired dis morning at school for work
aw! Wait that's the same as the "that's cute"reaction?
changing the mistakes on the paper sheet music that music notes sent me. Song is staying the same. :)
Missed most of it too! :(
It's MONDAY.
Some of us don't live near casinos, so we have to play online. Government, do you not understand this?
A little cracked ;) RT : It's Nat'l Egg Month. Here's to these good eggs:
Top 5 celebrity confidence tricks
Love this Grey's ep. showing an example to externalize and express disconnected feelings through play, and in this case, playing with tools!
Monday motivation: Inner beauty starts with being balanced, and journaling can put things into perspective. I’d like to share with you...
If I could, I would dare, Feed your dreams, And starve your fears
Big things coming soon, new music!
Is there a better conference tournament then the Big East? Great exposure for sponsors too!
I want to
I knew you would like that
I miss you so much!
child bye
I'd start a zombie magazine with all the other walker folks. I'd also like to have a huge Adamic beard and a buzz cut and tattoos on my head
So & I finally decided to drink the kool-aid... we started watching So Good! Can hardly contain my enthusiasm!
Hey you want to follow a 1D AND Brat account?! go follow
See ya in the NFL RG3
Only $22 for a refreshing Brazilian Bikini Wax ($45 value)! Last day
I has to delete we should be able to block those stupid sex things
Before you take the throne, check for a giant cardboard box propped up with a stick.
any thoughts on "commodity" as a keyword? i'm using keywords in my popular culture class and "commodity" would be great....
I knew when we collided, you’re the one I have decided, Who’s one of my kind.
:) RT : Who has two thumbs and loves ice cream? Everybody with two thumbs.
Color me jealous! I wantz one! Next project...nerdy fashion line: Thirsty Smithsonite Couture?
I feared that this was bound to happen Sugarland almost died 2 who should they sue The State of Indiana? whynot
that's... depressing.
y not my mother of my CHID I dislike that baby mama wrd
you misunderstand. I'm asking about the possibility that what the cops were using was pressurized Taco Bell flatulence.
im bored
It's happening again.. But oh well
running errands be there shortly
the guitar pick brand name is, Dava. By the way
I look at the human race & think, who the fuck should be lonely, & you look lonely so why the fuck not? Ahahaha.
New music videos for your viewing pleasure. 1. Tyga feat. Drake-"Still Got It" Tyga strolls down memory lane in the stre
ADDY Awards tonight...plus giving scholarships to 5 deserving students...and something from our young advertising professionals
How do travel dollars support America? Let us COUNT the ways...
I was joking around with the tweeting maegan thing?? And now I'm uptight.
IM DONE WIT THA BULLSHIT ITS A INSIDE THING BUT I KNOW YALL FEEL ME.
same here
M...cookies
You can follow the brilliant and beautiful (not to mention 2 time Emmy award winning) face of CARRIE HAMMER at -she's the best
Uh oh! goes IN! S/O We are BoneBreaker Studios (resistance is futile), and we support this artist s/o
Maybe Starbucks could just sponsor a holiday for you in a vat of delicious iced coffee?
can we have a season like last nights game !
cbox misses you, u big oaf fag.
-- Looking forward to June 2nd!
No longer positive, neutral, negative analysts is enough. Need more granular tonality: irritated, angry, furious, etc
If we wander aimlessly, without thought as to our purpose, is it no wonder that so many are feeling lost?
Boom. Five miles run! First time I've run that far at once since mid-March! I have been such a slacker lately.
You can find out your personal risk for #diabetes for free. Learn more by texting HEALTH to 300400.
So say goodbye, so close your eyes. Say goodbye, and close your eyes, tonight.
I'm not scared of them. ;-)
I'm a fanfiction addict. So if you need a fanficiton recommendation for Bamon, Everlark, Zutara, and ect, i'm a good person to go to xD
Highlight of the #oscars ... playing FMK with for each group of winners.
Austin Mahone may just be a name to you... But to me it means the world. <3
10 Epic YouTube Videos That Will Get You Pumped for Skyrim
Most epic Mascot dunk ever! Awesome
Trim or shave?
I LOVE NICK YOUNG
I can't do anything without my hair being a mess
why would you need it? I thought the teller takes responsibility for verification of the check. A receipt in that case is enough
crying bc jonas brothers are perfect
ok, cool. You're lucky you got it early :-)
ACTORS, ACTORS, ACTORS!!!!
Feeding frenzy. He doesn't want to be the last guy to jump onto the train.
We agree!!
you're welcome for getting you 1/2 months off at Gold's Gym. I ended up paying more than you, of course.
If Al Davis walks on the field I have zero problem jump kicking him in the chest.
I have a Sessions Only Pass for sale to #ASC12. DM me if interested.
First terrible film of #SXSW: "Silver Bullets" My high school film class made more interesting movies.
Wow these #kids have a lot of energy to burn off today!!!
Anyone know of a speak easy near #cildc?
Just watched Rhyme & Reason dope ass documentary. Lots of history. Makes you wonder when did Hip-Hop stop being honest.
Debra lee look like a queen roach with that dress on . Who dressed her ? Fire them quick . Cuz thats a mess on her . Lol !
Spongebob:MrKrabs that really isn't a krabby patty with nails,nose hairs&cheese MrKrabs:Oh okay *eats* Wtf!? Spongebob:We ran out of cheese
Oy! How'd THAT work for you??? RT : Flavored my first cup of coffee with Cumin, not Cinnamon. It's going to be a long day
Glad you liked it...one of my most high traffic blog posts ever for sure
Woke up to 70 followers ( in 2 days) #blessed Thanks for ur support!
can't wait for your show in Dallas tonight! We'll be there with bells on, so to speak :)
Thanks for the follow Kevin!
Hm. When you don't know if an indirect tweets about you <<
": Through her passing the Gospel has been preached all over the world. John 12:24…… Awesome!!!!!"
word homie. Beep.
I See Your True Colors And I Ain't Feeling Em...
Staring at my poster that Austin signed for me<3
OK!!! How are you on stage, running for office, and sending subliminal love messages to a woman not your wife?!
Seth got me an Ed Hardy face mask...so I don't have to cover my face anymore on his show.
I expect any Dispatch sports clarifications have to wait for CBJ public relations dept. approval.
I can't wait!
probably but I can't afford that haha
Have you checked out our new mobile site yet? Making it easier for our adventurous students to find courses and register!
sad to see you go too baby girl
Ok so 3 episodes in and HBOs #Girls continues to confound me. So well written but I hate all the people in it. Maybe that's the point...
When you going to open a place in the Mid-Cities? Don't get to Greenville much anymore.
knock 'em dead! RT : #hth2012 my & 's paper is in is about to begin. Session is social media, new media & the past.
Anyone who wants to make a difference and give of themselves should start training for the #peaceride! It's going to rock & help!
wheelchair and if anyone pushed in or got cheeky, she'd hit them with her stick and give them a mouthful. It was hilariously
"Heaven! It waits them all!" (Break This Stone)
#Dancemoms melissa is crazy today
I'm beginning to think coffee has achieved self-awareness and is trying to escape.
I'm excited for game though have a feeling it's gonna some real playoff atmosphere
Oh right - of course. :) We shared that a week or so ago. Didn't connect the hashtag & your post! Ha. Love the project!
": The minute you start caring about what other people think, is the minute you stop being yourself."
Being lonley is def one of the worst feelings, maybe because it goes hand and hand with depression
please just name it something else as married is not yours to use. You are different and proud of it. be creative.
Of course! Can't wait to see you for a clean up.
Thanks for what you are doing!
it's alright. :)
Without a doubt, the web and social media are making it easier for businesses to communicate with their publics
In 10 years, FIU will be ahead of The U in all facets: Athletics, Med School & Law School. Power of the people. Retweet if you believe...
Depends on the guy...drug dealer or pimp. Lol RT : A man will kill you over a woman before he kills you over money....
(#ff) I can actually hear you say those words in that calm trademark asian james earl jones voice. Werid!
Ok I hear ya. In NY listening to FM 97.1
so its 5 am and i woke up just to tweet you
Finally found the inspiration to write some new music. Here goes something
Except, every time I'm in Palos, I'm amazed by how pretty it is. All those woods!! (And there are good churches...)
Bray be lookin sweet AND bad in his sleep. LOL! Kids. Love em man.
Watching football on my laptop just isn't the same
thanks for the follow ..finding some good food spots in Modesto?
dude tell me about it :/ I was just talking about you thee other day with ant! But I got alot to fill you in with girrl :)
excited and adoring but not impressed.
Day off from #running was much needed! Muscle recovery is just as important...right? Got some chores done to!
I'm glad my temper has calm down cuz I almost curse the supervisor out for being an asshole Fuck em I need this bread so he can't touch me
Happy Birthday!!!! Have a blast and enjoy your day!
Excited about my upcomng #speaking class. So grateful for the overwhelmingly positive response from current groups. bit.ly/mptaaa
lol I guess he stole my name off the attendance sheet -.-
I feel
We should talk, I'd love to hear more about who you are and tell you a bit about our vision for the midwest.
Awesome ! And welcome to our tweets. Looking forward to yours.
KREIDER WITH THE ASSIST!!!
YAWN, Awake and making coffee too late in the day.
Do your thing tonight broo.
Thanks for posting, Ben. Glad you like it!
are you gonna come to do a showing in chicago for smitty? cause i wanna see it!
Not as good as ours, I'm sure. #twitterwar RT : great! Let us know what you think :-)
Birkbeck allows a leadoff double to Mike Kingery, but settles down to get the next three. Mariners lead 3-2 after two innings.
Be a friend to yourself, and others will be so too Thomas Fuller
you should follow me back gorgeous;+)
Awesome, Russ! Great peeps up there at the ole W-B! Say hello to Valerie for me. I'll be there in Feb & will look for you!
Langley says it's distressing UCAN has decided to dissolve instead of opening its books and being honest about its finances.
It's just Robert, it is what it is. I'm great & thats all that matters 😊
im such a fucking lady but im dancing like a hoe! haha :)
I could care less about Klout, but um...thanks? :-)
Can yall like take my name out of the mentions ? :)
#3WordsForYou Trust in God 
Any petitions in Ward 8? I haven't seen any yet.
I've recently been batting around the idea of sending in job applications even though I don't need a job.
Nah just bored..
#np I shot the maid by greeley estates<3 I miss these guys wish they would stop in el paso again hint hint
Just said farewell to one of my favorite colleagues ever, Good luck in Dallas! Tell we said hello!
Thanks for RT, hope you are well :) xx
Save the Date... Saturday June 2nd... For something Enchanting!
RT I don't care where LeBron James ends up... As long as it's not at 11pm on TBS.
....and remembering no matter how much i succeed, only happiness makes this a successful journey.
hahahah ;) dude you make me laugh!
We all live with the objective of being happy; our lives are all different and yet the same. - Anne Frank
...also, it's lumpy
reply to this I want to see if it will fix my timeline I'm not getting updated
Council is getting multiple reproduced emails concerning Memorial hospital. Does anyone know where they are originating from?
What is a class, lesson, activity or camp that you have always wanted to try? What should Campopoly.com feature?
I was then an now I'm onmy way bacc to StL
Space mining? Good luck with that one. Get past the Space Treaty and you might have a chance but how does that lower launch costs?
Stop by and celebrate Superbowl at Atmosphere Bar,also right after the game the Diva Show hosted by Angelique Munro will start!!
The Flo+TheMachine show is sold out this Sat - but we have tix this hr! Listen for your cue!
YOU'RE ONE OF THEM. THANKS JOHN.
That's true. I think this gubernatorial race is rather interesting.
it would be better if you followed me
he was my teacher in high school. He deserved it. Just kidding, he was a good guy.
love 9 innings. As a fan i need to ask for speed fixes for ryan Braun and rickie weeks. Much faster!
I might not be what color you want me to be, but I'm the brightest crayon in the box.
Hey Im bored lol
who is the tottenham supporter in the studio?
congrats on the awards guys! You deserve it and more!!
Just got like five feet away from a deer pretty kool
Heroes Amber & Nathan are heading to "south jungle" with water and socks. There was a big group of ppl missed yesterday on outreach.
Looking for a sharp PDX content strategist to jump in to help organize and present detailed product info for a website. DM me.
sometimes you get to impersonate other drummers during a session, this time it's Danny Carey, ain't nothin wrong with that!!
625 today with me! ": oh i remember now...i called 4 an hour too...and yeah now imma get tight with "
yes! Thanks Haymitch!
Happy Holidays from Auto Glass Experts
what up lil buddy! How you been? How's dancing been for ya?
DS: keep your head up Jimmy
Will the hometown football team Helix-La Mesa take the win in today's Div II game? Watch LIVE today @ 4pm on Chan 411
go to bed kiddo
other times, when we try to change to meet someone elses expectations, we end up getting stabbed in the throat with a pen.
i did. i had homemade starbucks in the pot.
lemme know how that goes haha!!
Hey babe so how was the party. Shouldn't you be sleeping by now? lol
'They do not want to change their policies. They just want you to think they have changed their policies'
Super Bowl is the top home party event of the yr ahead of NYE says NFL & USAs 2nd biggest food consumption day of the yr behind Thanksgiving
I haven't found any app that is that much of a power hog.
sounds good Jay!
-- just watched #eCupid. Cute movie. :)
Go to the gym or keep pinnin on ?
By learning you will teach; by teaching you will understand. Latin Proverb
Come on O's! You can do this! Then its time for a Budlight in Federal Hill!
Searching for beds in Portland in April :)
In addition, said that following twitter chats helped prepare him for the expo and researching companies before hand
Was videoed at Longsands, made a music video in school, and had a lesson outside. School is the funniest sometimes
quiet night for a full moon.
Sounds fun, wish I was there!
uh... I'm your best friend. I deserve it.
Full and busy afternoon! Thanks for hanging out with us, peeps!
goodluck cuties Iu god bles
Just finished Where She Went by Well done sequel to a fav #yalit book, If I Stay. Exclnt #summerreading!
\ And I enjoyed the chance to interact with people truly committed to adding value and making a difference.
Why must even the best ideas be "sold"? What happened to listening, engaging, sharing, and moving forward collaboratively with customers?
It's Friday and a good day to smoke something in a cool handmade pipe....
Is it just me, or does Harry Reid exhibit signs of mild cognitive impairment?
There's our Miramar, FL girl singing for Elton John! Pepsi commercial during
HELLO ian
that's a big band. orchestra big.
Happy birthday :]]
We Are About To Through Up Some Tracks Done By JPryme!!
lol Ikr I feel like weird on twitter in front of everyone I don't know lol
There is one. And will only ever be one Louis Armstrong. Gracious I love this man's voice.
If I was the space shuttle, I would be wondering where all this attention was when it was time to renew the program.
Don't forget the playlist, no curse words!
Happy New year! It is now 2012, but don't put undue pressure on yourself to make up for everything you didn't accomplish in 2011.
well, I guess that's okay then. ;) as long as nerdy goodness is happening!
Oh to twitter again...
My nana: becca you don't seem to happy eating that soup. My mom: its not soup, its cereal. Lmao (x
karthik is not on twitter and not active on facebook too. why?
Follow me on instagram i follow back
Tech curriculum development:we were asked 'what are the "technologies" that we want students to master?' What do you think?
Please hope this person survives .... god be with him/her ... they hit a cement divide going like 50 the car is totaled massivly..
My damn phones off & i couldnt call ;( Hope youre okay, i text you! Im.worried sick. More than you know ;( </3
Now im on a ramen noodles a day diet
Held my 1st gold medal!...but lost respect for the athlete when she dissed the intern class in front of me, an intern.
Easy to dream a dream, it's harder to live it!
": Hope our brothers & having a "refined" time in NYC!!"
Vinny and his spelling mistakes ! Lol 😁 It's cute 😊
The art of being happy lies in the power of extracting happiness from common things. -Henry Ward Beecher
At the airport for early flight to Hartford, CT. Speaking today at #Wesleyan. Excited to be part of the CAAS's First Book Series.
We are in throes of planning now. The Maritime Ghost Conference is going to be one-of-a-kind!
ugh that is a beautiful thing
Jesus, Allah, Moses, the 12 apostles, and Tibetan monks won't help Tebow tonight
It's nice to get away, but nicer to get home. On my way.
At the gym with
I know sorry! :p
Sjshdisnsbdkabadjos. Need sleep.
Somebody Please send me pics of the metorshower tonight!!
Is anyone else addicted to pawnstars? Can't stop watching it...
he's been in the league 2 years longer than dwill and cp3
Just ran my first ever #thatcamp scheduling session at #THATCampOSU. Is there a merit badge for that, Amanda? :)
Sorry about that :(
Behind the scenes video coming up in a few DONT MISS IT!
If I had a dollar for every email that tried to sell me an "ROI machine" today, I'd have 10 dollars.
I just saw my future.
Huge Jimi Fan. I think Lenny Kravitz or Terence Howard would be good picks to play Hendrix.
FLASH SALE: One more hour left to stay with Glenn this weekend for only $94! Call 888-717-8851 to book tonight or tomorrow, ends at 3 p.m.!
thanks doll:) that was sweet
ya til wed!
hungry as day but really dont feel like feeding myself....a damn shame...
Is anyone else having problems with their twitter account. I keep having to reset my password!
Wowzers. 40 hires in 30 days is kicking my booty! What's your favorite interview Q?
When the enemies of the US find out what horrible actors our marines are we're going to be in trouble
It is. :) He proposed to me down along the cherry trees last year, so it's pretty perfect. I think I'll keep him!
I'm in, but shouldn't we buy them together?
Awww thanks! Though all I really do on it is reblog stuff lol :)
Ok I think its time to get some new followers, so give me a shout out.
Sonic Happy Hour.
Break a leg..
umm more than likely Friday
Celebrating my cousin's graduation from college today...my family is being oddly apolitical today
No lack of enthusiam here...Cop Rock was amazing. Thanks for sharing, and Be Careful Out There on those drums, you know.
Not heated but it will do
i hope that one day we are all in a position to become a unit again
Ok God, I see you moving but ...
Are you one of the many ODs or OD students in DC for the AOA Congressional Conference? Tweet your pix/meetings using hashtag #aoahill!
Bold beggar, there.
Let the #stpattysday countdown begin! Be sure to hit up tomorrow! Text FREE to 35350 for #FREE prizes from Mo's &
cuz its finally
Rick, my crying towel was bigger.
my grandma is so short and cute ❤
Be yourself.❤ People may or may not like you, but it's important that you stay true to who you are.
Sittin at wife's job waitin on her to be done wit the last client
Just got my #klout perk in the mail - the #gecko bobblehead! Way cool. Thanks
In this Grizz-Clips series, both teams should have lost in 6. Spurs could be rusty, but don't think MEM-LAC good enough.
quit acting like a woman
Smelly cat, smelly cat, what are they feeding you? Smelly cat, smelly cat, it's not your fault.
Punch me kick me cut me burise me but in the end its gonna hurt u more then me <3<3
RT : I think this race is over | I agree
Kitchen Remodel and Contractors Valencia 91354 » General ...
i feel great, but im terrified of tomorrow's geometric test. and what bout u?
Cool new German word: "Energiewende" (= massive retooling of Germany's energy system away from nuclear and fossil fuels).
And she'll never fucking know that, these eyes that in staring at
I only got to play guitar with antonio :/ lol
my kids have to earn screen time. growing up it was reading and weeding. living in the city, my kids will do extra reading!
i'm good, a bit distracted by the laker game. you?
It is TOO hot outside. Really, just stay home, NONE of you need ice cream😡🔥
I'm sick of dis teacher
“ The White Man is the Last person Black Folks need to worry about Holding us down.. We do enough of that ourselves!”
Q has anyone ever had sex while the kids were n the bed with them?
Tank even if we can make playoffs RT : New on OregonLive: Trail Blazers: Is it time to "tank" or are the playoffs still in play?
Thank you for making run after class!!! 😘😘😘
Want my bed.
Google is taking aim at Apple’s dominance of online music; Android users can buy music on the web & automatically sync it to their phones.
stopped reading at "doing homework". Get out of there now
Beware grilling outside in Dallas ...spontaneous combustion may occur!
♡RT : Success is not for the chosen few but rather for the few who choose it.
justin is such a baby. like UGH. i'm like smiling at how much of a baby he is. believe tour come NOW !!!
Eating home made trail mix with raw cacao nibs, sunflower seeds, golden raisins, walnuts, pumpkin seeds and pine nuts.
"Your friends are crazy." "They're not my friends."
I'm great boo. just working a lot :-/
thank you for the RT!! We hope to see you there
in the booth gettin this mixtape together Love,Pain&Anger look 4 that
Congrats Jason!! No surprise
Ha, just realized i can barely talk or hear myself. Darn that concert hit me hard! :D
You just made my whole week.
Did you hear that Meg? Guys can marry other guys now. So...this is awkward, if they can do that, it's pretty much it for you, isn't it?
What's the best thing after a long day at work? Coming home to a quiet house, making myself dinner && relaxing.
New idea: boo as grads walk across the stage. Keep 'em grounded, yo.
Aww thank you! The PrimZin looks fabulous. Working but I will try and catch the next one. Cheers!!
New word "monkeypox."
your so full of wisdom! The true value of mahogany and the true value of our minds! you are like an owl! haha
somehow I'm thankful abt d rumor re #Dolphy , as d belief goes: He will live LONGER!!! Met him when i was a kid! Give my luv!
likely story...
Consider it done brother.
Spoiler alert: #TheAvengers was FUCKING amazing! Stay thru ALL the credits
Passing better so far on this PP
nah, they are in trouble. 31 pt trouble
Thank you for the RT
you da best 😊
Haven't done one of these in a while, question of the day: Do you prefer a beer or a glass of wine? What specific one is your favorite?
#WildCardWednesday Tim Wilson - "Dale Darrell Waltrip Richard Petty Rusty Awesome Bill Irvan Gordon Earnhardt Smith"
In my head I am singing "shipping u pto Boston" I had a friend live there, said it was expensive. Would move 4 women though :D
Unprepared for class in the really important ways: forgot my coffee, forgot my water, forgot candy for during the break.
what do I need to do to either a) meet you b) play a round with you or c) have a beer with you?
HEAT ACADEMY!!!!!
Bout to take me a 30 min break on da clock.:-
already here :)
You'd think trained librarians with master's degrees wouldn't have such a hard time figuring out how to unsubscribe from a listserv. Jeez.
Congrats on getting your 100th career point!!!!
Grouplove coming on stage in the next ten. Anyone know these guys?
sounds mint
hahahah spell check
How u like that #sixers win #magicjohnson ? #hater #whatwouldyoufightfor sixers fight for respect lets go!!!
So who wore their costume to Pizza Shuttle this weekend?
was good?
Happy Birthday! :)
What would you do with $647 million?
heat game will end the day right. #heatnation #whitehot !
you should defiantly do it, cuz I'm positive there's nothing ur bad at
You know my drink! ;) It's only available to certain customers (i.e. me)
Skip the game and just watch the commercials on Hulu....but that Darth Vadar add is amazing
Amen to that !
Join us tomorrow as we take on CMU!
If anybody has a Path feel free to add me.
LMAO RT : “: bout to tear this stage down in columbus with tonight” going to the wrong festival
Just had a great trip to Alfred. It was great seeing all the old haunts. Now back to the job hunt
I just want to show you how much I appreciate you..
You Could Be Winning Too If You Weren't So Busy Hating.***Hating Is A Waste of Useful Energy***
Just came back from a 2 hour walk with my parents! #exhausted #feelsgreat :)
Expecting a little coopetition when #IBM and #Microsoft Execs onstage today at 10 am ET at #ec12 should be interesting
#FirstEdition has no #swag -- but we do have #RootWad and #Chalonga -- now the code names for &
lets get it!!!!!Cant Wait!!!
i'm not even sure what that means, but I'm sure I don't agree.
Will be at the Opolis tonight checking out The Costanzas! Come say hi!
Whether or not the company you are interviewing with requires it--you are showing respect when you dress business professionally
And a player named Shabazz.
Roasted acorn squash w/ raspberry sauce!
Will do. RT : #BkprTip: Don’t b afraid to ask your clients for feedback & listen to what they have to say. U will get grt info!
she's good people.
You need to visit. We would get into grand trouble.
Just played a major role in history w/726 others (so far) at my polling place
Hope you enjoyed the event!
I dont talk to Ryan anymore :T
Kaushal! Hope you are having a great day. Happy hump day to you too! See you soon!
I can never tell with you..
hell yes!
What is it about Pollan that you enjoy?
Speakers include Jack O’Connell (former SSPI), Susanna Cooper (Pro Tem’s office), Rick Simpson (Speaker’s office) & Mark Baldassare (PPIC)
Damn, one month already. 😊
Indeed. Can't wait. RT : and you and I. Let that sink in
: Can't afford to pay big $$'s - so I'm just starting to collect prints - linocut, lithos, screenprints... I love printmaking!
Thanks for following, Miss Lisa! :-)
One day after his show called the FDIC socialist, now Cavuto is fear mongering over a run on the banks in Europe.
you were famous before that ;) Thanks for being a part of it!
I don't want to argue with somebody, who is totally irrelevant anymore. It's pointless.
New Found Glory.
Thanks for those RT's for the arts!
Its my birthday! Hoping to get a Happy Birthday from today. It would mean everything to me. <3
follow please????
good class indeed. my oreo 💙
your welcome dude.
hell yeah to the yogo pants!!
mhmmm RT : that is www.aaron.tv ?
Why would people leave Ariana over the cutest tattoo.
Makin some covers :P they shall be up in a couple of hours :D
Early winter. Ugh. Only consolation is that the Red Sox are an unholy mess. Still, it was a fun season and I'm glad I got to see 3000.
It was so great to see you at the House and meet the cute boy!
SOTU--exactly..unfettered free markets were the problem.
For dope videos/music follow and of course myself, we got the Chicago suburbs on lock. Shows booked. Shirts sold.
So I see everybody in the bay doing this j12 dance huh?
When are you coming out with a book? Seems like you have the midas touch for business and I would love to get some mentoring.
ah my Facebook is linked :s x
Trying to refactor a tiny PHP project to follow the MVC architecture. It's not going well :\ Anyone know of a good tutorial???
S/o Happy Mothers Lifetime
When ever someone ask me a question first thing I say "GOOGLE IT!!" O.O
This Nigga G mad i Got a A on the test.. now i'm on the bus stop and SHIT
I figured I should alert the grammar police after LeBrons post game interview with Craig Sagert
RT Leadership is not a position or a title, it is action and example.
Haha I just might. I'll let you know!
Having an early dinner date with Louie, and the restaurant is playing a lot of Justin Timberlake. , make more music, please? :)
I love music, really. That doesn't mean I want to listen to the neighbor's playlist instead of birdsong & wind in trees. #amwriting #gah!
Lamborghini mercy. Yo chick she so thirsty
#Nonprofit #Advocacy Institute - Early bird registration, save $20 if signed up by 8/5! bit.ly/qnYmhu Get your voice in politics!
Big day for many.. graduations, marriages, etc. However, nothing is bigger than my #CAPS game tonight!!!
Ugh, 2 and a half hours!^^♥
also = happy kids.
And what a fun dinner it was! Delish food and great conversation! So nice to meet you. Hope you like The Good Dream in July!
First show for this marching season later today:)
You do your research!
LOL are you really talking about me when I'm standing right next to you?
you stay chuck e chessing lol
Breaking news: Portland police arrested 2 people at #ndaa #occupypdx march.
Oh, I agree! Too much new stuff to spend time on stuff you're already read.
Interested in auditioning for AU #Symphonic #Band? Rmb to bring your concert band instruments back to school this Fall. Stay tuned!
“: #Colts Fleener says Luck was already calling plays "with like 30 words in them."” Kid's going to be just fine...
Starring , , , , : PROS AND CONS: A FANTASY FOOTBALL MOVIE
Nick Young needs to be in the whole 4th he's clutch
When you realize is the lens is no more than an extension of your eye, you worry less and focus more.
Despite the crappy experience when spotify for android loses network connectivity, it wins the battle vs
All New Year's parties officially over, given the latest S&P downgrades, Greek talks stalling & Mideast chaos bubbling - just for starters.
55% off Martinizing Dry Cleaners service on www.crowdclick.com!
Off work now it's time for this #workoutflow then eat :)
Working two jobs for minimum wage
It was perfect, fits the culture, unique style of stadium and fans in Miami...they should be embarrassed for bringing Ali out
Interesting, thanks for sharing.
You mean, like an rental? Nice!
dude so rad ...congrats chef!!!
i really want to quit track at this point:(
;-Now leaving work tired... Hope my bae get his L's tomorrow :)
RT : Realizing as you get older you really have no one <<<<
lmaooo im so funny
Wow!! USPS plans 2nd ounce free for 1st class mail. That means all MiniBük products up to 88 pages mail for 44 cents!!! Open the floodgates!
they want Gaustaud but not for a
omg u finally got on twitter
Rip number 55
so proud of you!!!!
Love it!
wake up, little Suey, wake up?
Next week. Take a 'lunch' break. ;)
Lets keep it going Pastry world !!!!!!!!1
At Univ of Maryland to honor the last class of my fav prof from college. Humanities courses can make all the difference -even for bio majors
Thanks for giving us a try! Hope you enjoy your food
You must learn to translate #wisdom and strong feelings into labor.
Yo homie,...whats good with the "in the end"beat?...Hit me bruh.
That is actually my other account andi dmed justin for u all 5x :)
RT : Army Strong Remix!!! Ft Too #STRONG . Be On The Lookout!!!
"Best u ever had,,I don't wanna brag" Okay luvin the new tune from #johnlegend (Think like a man soundtrack)
Ugh let me blow some skunk
Misty morning in #harlem. Sipping the brown stuff and preparing for a full day of #yoga for all ages.
There is a sanctity involved with bringing a child into this world, it is better than bombing one out of it.
What is your opinion of pop-up events? These are events that are created by word of mouth and pulled together a la flash mob.
are you not at Spirit anymore?!:(
I need to shave my legs.. But yk.. I prolly won't. lol
you're making me hungry! I'll eat it all… cc
Would anyone be interested in free tickets to our show with Hey Monday? Follow ...info coming soon
And yet, I have never shazamed... <hangs head in shame />
S/O to all my new followers 😊❤
My desk is super organized at work. I have everything in one big pile.
Nice! If it aint broke... break it... and make it better.
true! but now he's gone rogue & is asking ?s of the setup lady that should b handled by genius bar.
Where was this sunshine yesterday ?? Froze my ass off at Thunder Over Louisville and missed the Big Yankee Rally at Beantown !!!
Busy day! Just got around to eating lunch. Fortunately, I'm going running tonight so dinner will be late too.
Adult Chorus rehearsing Vaughn Williams Mass in Gm for Nov 7 Evensong, Wash National Cathedral, 330PM
. think we might want to back off reporter live touch screen segments? Coolness has worn off. Substance over graphics.
They Probably felt bad that his birthday was all the way in July..
And we're rolling. Vice Chairman Cliff Illig on the podium giving opening remarks.
Always! Lol RT : Lmao twitter is getting ready to be hilarious..theres some salty ass ppl and some ppl getting excited..love it
The only way to do great work is to love what you do. And if you haven't found it yet, don't settle. -Steve Jobs
RT : #LAKings did stay in the hotel last night, 'keeping things the same' said one player.
writing about high school basketball and watching college basketball. Go Irish!!
Me & have a super awesome summer planned. California, Nashville, Florida... I hope everything works out <3
Idk lol But it makes ya think doesn't it? ;p
follow me back .
Kelsey is interviewing Bowling for Soup tonight any questions?!
Excellent choice!
haha way to go, my last name is in my twitter name :o haha
Where is the Terrace Webcam when you need it..
Why the fuck are girls always so moody
Watching American Idol
: how dare you.?! Lolz what chu goin their for.?
Been saying this for a long time. Carmelo Anthony has been underrated for most of his career. Best shooting superstar from '03 class.
#69Factsaboutme 32. Language Arts is my favorite subject.
Are they giving out medals in Vancouver or tea saucers? Good lord those things are large!
It seems some people have been saying bad things about us online. I will not be fooled and click the link.
you raise me up
preach that shit!
"Don't blame it on the sunshine, blame it on the Boogi"- Miss u Michael
True! So we are up to 6%
"Driven" the mixtape drops May 18th..
Join Las Vegas VIP club and get exclusive discounts at area restaurants and businesses..
Watching Dave chappelle show season 2 instead of going to church
obviously nets are tanking games for a top pick, what would we get if the have a top 3 pick?
so far she has resubmitted her transcript to show increase in grades. how else can get off wait list at
#JamesGangSKC #SportingKC So i tried making a logo and failed..... Can anyone help?
its the playoffs, a lot of people played banged up. Forgot Noah was out too. They're done. Only excuse is D. Rose going down.
awww well come and visit me and the new bambino in Encinitas anytime. staff #roadtrip!
Time to make a difference Colorado REDI!
Summer is almost here. I'm ready for bball camps, recruiting, a lot of fishing, and some country music.
If I didn't earn it, I don't want it. If I want it, I'll go and get it. (rinse, repeat)
Politicalspeak is frustrating.
right on - be there soon.
Most people mess up many times before refining their process. Dont give up because u mess up. Keep going until u figure out what works
Just go with WordPress. I imagine building something more elaborate in Drupal for a huge conference, though.
Eat, Pray Love tonite
No worries. We'll have a tweetup JUST FOR YOU one day.
Musicians and artists alike tap into a part of their brain that is very miraculous.
I think she was referring to when she allergy punched that girl. And she sorta looks like a vamp. Haha
I wish! Can't go this year but am eagerly waiting to see who wins. If you get in, take pics! ...If they let you
somedays I want to be a cowboy
Brenda Brenda Brenda Brenda Brenda Brenda is asking advice @ going to Hawaii. Going on business trip to Oahu. Should I go to another isla..
Good Morning! A good painting to me has always been like a friend. It keeps me company, comforts and inspires- Hedy Lamarr
For a profitable list offer a service that people need or desire
hahaha yess, yes he does X ]
Anybody got a good book recommendation? Need something good to start the weekend.
Clippers still fly under radar. It's hard to grasp gap unless you're here. Homeless guys ask for Lakers scores. They're HUGE.
lol i was getting mad at u...i thought i was talking to myself#mean mug
Any of Sarah Vowell's books. She reads her own and I find her to be a delightful narrator.
Enjoying Vegas??? When does the new job start?
That's fantastic work, Mikey.
hahaha I know we have lots of variety of plants etc maybe thats why
He won't tell me his name
Latest Marquette Law political poll results officially due out in about 10 minutes, but has details now.
All i want for xmas is you!
The eagles finally realized they couldn't get a first round pick for Samuel.
- No Rental Car For Me !
totally forgot, i literally banged out 30 string friendship braclets last night, what colors do u want
In an industry where we constantly gripe about #foi requests — kudos to #FDA 's Jason Sadler for making #FOIA requests a breeze
LA Startup Weekend at is sold out (sold out quick). Stay tuned on for updates.
Was actually thinking about that last night. We do indeed. Any time April 12? I'm open until 2pm.
Country Pandora <3
Taking Chloe to see The Lorax.
Live life with No Regrets <3
I have a book that's ready. I just think it might make the world a worse place. Therefore, I might not release the book to the public.
In prep rm backstage getting ready for sesh #nbcusummer press day
thanks so much for keeping me up to date with the dash girls!, i dont know what i could be without you! :D:D
Mann I wish I didn't live in this small ass town, id prefer dallas or austin, and if I lived outta state id live in like miami or lA
“: When you hear and song from guitar hero on the radio and just blurt out GUITAR HERO” happens all the time.
what happened?
Ann McCallum's math adventure RABBITS, RABBITS EVERYWHERE: A FIBONACCI TALE is perfect reading for the Year of the Rabbit!
She has class
thanks for the #FF -- right back at you!
bleh tell me about it
Just chill the fuck out!! lmaoo just chill it's Saturday partyy put music on blast get high?!:)
Booked my ticket to Delhi - leaving Mar 12! While I'm there you can follow updates from the conference
Q. When not drinking #wines of #Burgundy, what are your go-to varieties?
Why is 's single "Who Are You When I'm Not Lookin" sitting at #4??? Can we get a re-count Billboard Country?
have a good trip and be safe in Afghanistan.
it's good you know my name
Nice! I will listen to it at random times.
i just realized kenzie has a snickers bar in his avi pic.
😭😭😭😭 this vacation sucks already
Been up since 4 smokin my as off..
Is your work keeping you busy or are you busy looking busy? Set priorities and goals and tackle the hard stuff first.
Follow your heart. Follow your dreams. No matter where it takes you. Be what you want to be.
i feel ya, its not mine too.
How much is it? Maybe we can still make the dream happen ;-)
Hopefully #Capcom will deliver one soon. I'd even love a #remake of Resident Evil 3 and RE3: Nemesis. That'd be awesome. ^NE
Everybody hates Chris is the best show in the world. I will be watching it in my college dorm this fall. That show rocks!!
it would mean the WORLD to me if you tweeted me happy birthday ! my birthday is Thursday but todays fine:)
this one I don't get sorry ... I don't know your not going to hell though I would take your place
I love you.<3
ok, fine - i'll call it. y'all will take over the world one Sushirrito at a time (cc )
i think it's time i revealed #OperationDarkFoxx: i dyed my hair! :3
Don't fucking assume or judge my intelligence.
I just wanted you to know I've always been a fan. Keep doing what you do, I got your back. Prez. Rollin Knights MC "Born"
lol ok ill stay hoe. D:
hey. I'm good just been catching up on sleep. How are you?
Thank you, Ken! How is the world of solar treating you?
The Minnesota Twins have agreed to terms with pitcher Francisco Liriano on a one-year, $4.3 million contract, avoiding arbitration.
My film "An Affirmative Act" (stars Charles Durning/Costas Madolar/Eric Ettabari/Blanche Baker) now playing On Demand on Time Warner Cable!
Bored at home -_-
I'm gonna need some rhinestones, a #bedazzler, some #washi tape, and some glitter pens....
We want to know what types of new edibles you would like to see us make? Share your ideas :)
proximate objectives - love'em
I am thankful that you can still go home again, even if it isn't your home
in line too. so frustrating
the same & bored /:
Oh well, life just got tougher
My kid doesn't eat much of the food I prepare for her. She will however. Seek out any random piece of lint & eat that. *sigh*
have you seen 's shirt on our site today, "Rock Daddy"?
sorry, I'm bad with sarcasm. I agree with you lol
I AGREE!
Scotty! Welcome to the page brother, enjoy the music, thanks!
ESPN's joins The Student Section today at 4:30 on WSUM
Movie time seeing
good luck brotha and congrats!
Dizzee Rascal just started on the Bridge Stage!
Maybe they liked the first ceremony so much, they decided to have a second three months later!
Hey that was :D
If you listen to the right music with the windows down, the #Nashville #cicadaattack provides a little extra eerie quality.
Coupon offers in the emails will vary, won't necessarily be for AW, but sometimes will apply to all laptops.
thank you!
ITS SAD WHEN U LIE SO MUCH,U BELIEVE UR OWN BULLSHIT&ACCUSE OTHA PPL OF LYIN ON U STFU&B REAL(u say u real right)Tell da truth if u not wrng
Escondido police lured teacher to Starbucks, thinking he would meet teen he's accused of molesting. Instead he was arrested.
Daisy Scouts meeting after school. I am volunteering at this one. Should be fun.
*raises hand*
You're so welcome Danielle!
How has sound technology come so far & yet the McDonalds drive-thru still sounds like someone is farting into a walkie-talkie.
#What2ChainzWouldSay Hit The Club In That New Range, Ya Girl Left With 2 Lames.. Im Tity Boi, Im 2Chains, Put That Together.. 2NAAAMES !!
What's love? Buying me pickle chips!
Eating tacos then gym.
Editing tonight. Editing Tomorrow. *sung like we've got tonight, who needs tomorrow
Morning, Twitter. How goeth your Monday. The sane me says fine. The insane me sez, everyday's Monday to me...
So proud of us :)
Yes it is RT : one night is too much.
Its not what you do, its how you do it !
70% of couples have a decrease in marital satisfaction after the birth of a baby. To change this the father needs to be more involved.
have fun in the ATL wish I could be there...congrats and good luck
Ah hell nah! RT : Rakim is opening for Kreayshawn.
hahaha skyrim is the funniest game for glitches. there is not even a debate.
Some people dont deserve children, and if that makes me a horrible person to say I am just a bad person, who is right.
Her, Ellie, Andy/Bobby, and baby Stan.
Love my wife!!
Ready for some #Blackhawks playoff action! Toews is back and feeling great. Good start. Go Hawks!
We love CM. :) Thanks for the info. Just an idea we're tossing around. It's been a while since any of us tumbled about.
ugh so jealous!!! Tell her amber says good morning 💙❤💙
Tournament Time! Let's Go
lies lies lies lies lies lies lies.
so much raw tension wasted. Tant pis!
Well I know who I will be cheering for on DWTS this spring!!
Looking forward to planning Kristin and Jerad's Wedding at Pipers at the Marott. It's right around the corner!
This is great! Keep the questions/comments coming, guys! <3 We want to know you!
That show is going to be so much fun.
We all have that one friend WHO NEEDS TO LEARN HOW TO WHISPER.
cannot wait for dinner with twitterless Missy. desperately in need of some real food and wine.
And we're BACK! Getting ready to record the #MashCast with , & Yes, we'll talk
I miss my Android. Damn hoodrat stole it after a month of enjoying it. Here's to you, escuela t(._.t)
they have come out and punched wade in the face. That impresses me.
Nope....Slippery Rock State
The one bloody thing that Pacers had to worry about with Orlando 3's and they are killing them on that shot.
Jesus I am trying to work here, now when I run out to see my clients I am going to have my mind running in circles :)
Where the fuck did Lehigh come from?!
Hey I'm younger than you so we totally can date..:)
Hope you are having a great, and relaxing fun time with yours truely! :) Take care
I really hope our players are seeing the tweets Cal is getting from these IU fans. Fuel to the fire.
LOL, just saying....
Did I mention that I love 's purple straws?
sounds like a nasty virus I had recently. Tough to beat.
lol oh. whatever, doesn't hurt to ask :p
My Daughter sure has an attitude but I love that I just hate that sometime she's a bully 😒
Still at work on Monument CIrcle in Indy even though most of my coworkers have abandoned me for the
Friendship is like a bank account. You can't continue to draw on it without making deposits.
Well I agree With Ric Flair,he is the greatest Wrestler in the History of Wrestling,if he says no its no
Can get Monta Ellis on twitter or what? Let's go Monta - know u r part of the highest scoring backcourt, but c'mon
from on education's digital moment. Tech disruption affects distribution, personalization.
I was going the more mundane route of rhubarb pie, but your idea sounds intriguing. Never made sorbet, though.
I followed you so it wouldn't be so awkward ;)
following you mami
#dsoc #slaleads how abt SLA create an indiv logo we can use in internal communications in our orgs? A personal brand for us to use.
Hardcore mini training day #2 kicked my butt. Ready for a drink
"When the end of mortal life comes, hesitate not to forsake this body for a more fit and beautiful form and to awake in realms of Supreme..
Hi there!
“: I shall be listening to beastie boys all day #RIPMCA” <--Another reason Rory kicks ass.
I had to dip out you know how mamas are haha. #alwaysinarush you did amazing though! :)
Already having the urge to high-five randoms
Romney's "I stand by what I said, whatever it was," bit is still hilarious. "I don't remember the talking point" is what he meant.
lol not missing much. most bars are filled with fake people and real assholes.
Same here. Numbers 5 & 8 are the ones that get to me.
Axley will be hosting our End of the Year Employment Law Update on Nov. 9 at The Edgewater Hotel from 1 – 4 p.m. Topics include: Disability…
Well that was a blow out...
Hard to believe I've been on Twitter over a year now!
they be boppin on a handstand
Sorry 4 slo rply. In some areas yes not in others. When carbon fiber legs outperform nat ones, will unimpaired want to switch?
Little Bad Ass Nigga! To That Crazy Ass Nigga! To that Good Ass Nigga! To if I needed IT I can get it Ass Nigga! Now I need mine Ass Nigga!
the thing that you fear the most doesnt exist until you give it life!
Fake Gucci that's that I don't like
Watching A Christmas Carol. Good movie, but idk what parent on their right mind would let a child watch this. It is scary!
You should probably include some of our Sweet Tea Vodka in that Arnold Palmer. We won't tell on ya!
Listening to "Manny Mokka & The Band on Fire" kill it!! Killin' Latin grooves..
Catch DJ T. On air at 5:30pm on Vamos a la Playa
Dinner: salad of wilted spinach, diced avocado, and radish kimchi. Pungency tamed by creaminess...Nevermind. This is getting way too sexual.
thank you seester! I miss you!
Im always up for a hike:)
What's up with my customized classes? In the main menu my assault class is my M16A3 but in the game I gotta use the AK-74M?
Middleton traffic: Parmenter St. roundabout and streets approaching it for 1 block to be closed from 9 to 11 a.m. May 24 for chipseal work.
Looking forward to today's SI Mentoring Program kickoff!
Only one more day! Get ready! :)
#NFAIS12 Camlek is the only speaker who consistently earns my trust and keeps my interest despite overly wordy slides.
Cracked my screen even more today .. Sweet . -__-
awww crap i mistakenly bid on something on campuslive
Tatzoo campaigns for locally endangered wildlife would make great content.
I give up on this whole wedding thing...
In politics stupidity is not a handicap. Napoleon Bonaparte
Hey stranger
eyelash fathoming
yai saw that one too. awesome!
RT : Follow all the awesome people we covered this week!
[P&I 2012 opening] Asia&#39;s largest Photo & Imaging Industry Show to get access to world&#39;s cutting edge equipment
Good night all!
RunTex hired to produce Trail of Lights - Austin American-Statesman (blog) RunTex hired to produce Trail of Lights Austin American-States
There's alot of shit I keep bottled that hurts deep inside of my soul & just know that I grow colder the older I grow.
Omg I love my parents they let me do everything with my friends as long as I did good in soccer great compromise!! :)
Good morning and happy Monday! How did you celebrate Mother's Day?
As a student, I speak for many when I say that I am disappointed in the lack of communication to the students about this.
This is really just another regular day to me.
The White Elephant Sale has started at the West Senior Center. Come on down to 4th & Beech in San Diego.
awww you're so sweet :). Glad you like it!
Revival day 3. A faithful believer with a pressing problem. Matthew 17:14-20 Dr. Booth
I think it will be! :)
OH indeed, this will be great!
It must be pretty awkward watching South Park with a black person,mexican or a gay person..all the jokes are directed towards them
Nice! Kitesurfing looks super super fun. Enjoy!
or you throwing right handed
Yeah exactly. Was no bad blood in the series. We get picked on by Canadian fans. They get it from Rangers fans. Commonness.
fantastic ideas from on making google maps keyboard accessible using the api
Even when he was with sorry ass Boston!
The Crowdbooster weekly email is some good stuff! Thanks again for the rec
Oh - thank you so much :-D
What about number of successful bunts? That's the only number that matters in baseball, right?
Thanks for the follow, Pete!
If you are eligible and need more info, please contact the Assessor's office at 312-443-7550.
someone is going to get hurt if doesn't fix this
just had a nice meal and a glass of Marques de Riscal Rioja. I just started cooking after 17 years of eating out!
RT : Let's go Marquette <-we love and let's go
Head in clouds it was love on the stage
James Jones look shook! I don't know man...
Sleep well Honey!!xoxoxoxooxox
your welcome, don't mention it!
wish I had time to grab lunch, I'll have to come in soon!
Sigh. Because I obviously don't have enough to do this week with HULLS2 and everything else.
So. Tired. Ugh. School.
What happens when we learn? A new wrinkle in the brain?
- well take em now then
RvD's Crassus boys ( and ) are not only powerful sketch comedians but also powerful WIZARDS.
that's what's up
Tonight was about me and the music, and no drug, drink, or person was going to take that away from us.
Thanks for the mention!
❤ Thanks for all the inspiration it means a lot. ! I Love you Chris ❤
We are giving away free shots for every #Braun hr this year. People are happy tonight!
I need a stress reliever.
morning....good day!
Drink up boys, Cupid's buying tonight!
Only because you're dropping knowledge!
RT : If the zombie #apocalypse happens, I'm just going to surround my house with outward facing treadmills. I should be fine.
GO TWEET HIM!!! HE JUST TWEETED
. No question re messages & streams. However, understanding and integration require time -- human time.
got you
Promise to hold.to touch me...love me....way past forever<3 -Romeo Santos ft. Usher promise
you know me - only in twitter 1x a month :) interesting poster -- I'll have to check it out
Wtf, talk about bs.
we're so excited for you to get done and settled in!!
"Nothing in all the world is more dangerous than sincere ignorance and conscientious stupidity." ~ Martin Luther King, Jr.
Thanks guys! Hope you are having a great Friday! Are we still on for June 2?
#oomf is cracking me up this morning
Just started a new position at TOSS - DM me for help with VMware, Falconstor, VTL, BCDR, SAN, Citrix, etc!
Has anyone noticed that Blake has a picture of a griffin above his name on his track suit? How great is that?
For me you'll always be 18 and beautiful and dancing away with my heart #ACMs ❤🎶❤
#PetLovers Plz remember #KillShelters don't close on wkends. #DOGS & #CATS are #EUTHANIZED #DAILY. If you can't adopt/foster: #help via RT's
"what a lovely homeless girl"
Craving a simple heirloom tomato salad with olive oil, vinegar and basil. Also an heirloom tomato tart, and a green tomato relish.
buut I still kinda wanna go...
good point. When you remember good times it's always about the experience!
u should meet up with me and Wisch
love you nigga.
Word to Blimpy.
RT : Tonight at the barn - Music City Roots has a great lineup for you - Drew Holcomb and the Neighbors, Billy Henson,......
OMG!! the sandman must have tripped and spilled the whole bag of sleepy dust on me...Night all!
why you unfollow me ?? FOLLOW BACK :o)
ha I wouldn't expect anything less
Need to get home! So much to do! I hate end of school year. So much work!
Who books a 6:00am flight, really? I did and am very tired for my flight to Boston.
where do you live??
The voice impersonation stuff starts to wear thin, but I'll never get enough of his monologues.
yes we have to represent well :)
Awesome! RT We're working on a new release for the #websiteanalyzer and should be launching tonite or tomorrow....
Happy Black History Month... Lets commit to learning a lot of what Afro Americans contributed to world!
my man
hi lanett and friend
Watching "harry potter and the chambers of secrets" c: After a long talk with my exboyfriend :(
Employment. Was nice while it lasted. Ugh.
Haha almost got it right. Effing taquitos. This rivals the bad sushi incident.. Whommmmmp.
thank you, we are at your service
Today's pet peeve: When people ask you a question and then text while you're answering them.
It was wonderful seeing early birds at this morning's screening, hosted by
Can you follow me please? I love you su much! Never change, you're amazing. Kisses. I'm proud of be simpsonizer22
Play some ball today got my Lin on now it's time to chill I miss myson & girl
my ebook can be downloaded for just $2.99. Please support the cause to help fight child poverty. Laws need to be overhauled!
If you want to watch the Super Bowl on a budget, we might be able to help with that...FREE appetizers will be served durning the game.
yes yes yeeessss!
RT this if your going to Austin Mahone's Concert in NYC
Hell no im leaving
Casino Night Tips -You may choose to give out prizes at the end of the night
I've developed the newest and hottest art movement. Unfinished minimalism, it's never been done.
God I love going to bed
i have officially fallen in love with you... my love only grows... wonder if you love me too?
Perez pitch count currently at 0...fyi
Ok I gotta know, where are you? looks amazing what
Winning is about heart to be in the right place. -Lance Armstrong
i like boys but only unooooo (:
Jesus You Are The Best!!!
What if you woke up today with only the things that you thanked God for yesterday?
Thanks again for all the birthday wishes and the birthday love, you guys made my day even greater!
Hey gave you her number in chicago. Call her.
Oh. Hello.
Whoops...I apparently am really tired...must have fallen asleep on the letter "e"! LOL Have a good night & wonderful week Soror
I may have just jumped up and cheered at a soccer goal. Obviously, I lost brain cells last night.
he stay on my mind all day , i promise
My seminar on philosophy of the arts discussed "Mulholland Drive". It remains indecipherable. We took a Sontag-esque approach.
"I got more than a thing for you, tattoo and ink for you right over my heart, girl I do the unthinkable"
That just happened.
cool thanks for the #love. Got another one coming in June. Great tunes and lots of fun!
... also beginning of another letter from daddy to z- #androidjesus totally love writing this novel &feel like it's a once in lifetime gift
the #EDM PLAYGROUND w/ IS LIVE RIGHT NOW! TUNE IN FOR THE BEST IN ELECTRONIC DANCE MUSIC! MANIC MONDAYS HERE WE GO!
If you don't know Between The Trees; I honestly feel bad for you. Okay. They're A M A Z I N G.
Paradise just got that much prettier with the opening of at DFS Waikiki yesterday. Spring in ladies!
[ #GeorgeClooney + The President = major political Soirée. Where? G's House. Burbank-Hollywood Proper | Watch #LA routes for traffic - oxox]
On way into the field and will be online later chao and thanks for the productive chat...
sometimes the hardest thing and the right thing are the same
These girls are rude
I did your Abs 10 this morning after the Fire 60...My Abs are already feeling it #can'twaittillmorning!
Not only is this the first Bubba to get a Masters, he's the first that even picked a major.
Why would Joe Manchin urge passage of such a Cap and Trade bill if he's so opposed to Cap and Trade generally?
big dittos back to you both!
Being Ignorant is not an attractive feature on anyone
man that other song is raw Drake and Nicki Minaj im so proud
So long as you're getting your money's worth!
‧Phill: lil put that down or im yelling MY mommy! ‧Lil: umm Phill we have the same mommy… Lmao
That's a lot of black smoke at 400 Briar for only one chief and no EMS, CFD.
Arrived in STL. Ten minutes at my folks' and I'm sipping cava w/ rose hip liqueur, & a Spanish cheese/cracker/olive tray.
buy hardcover for $15.91. Sell for $14.99. Amazon takes a cut. I end up paying like $3 for book. Not Eco-friendly, though.
Everybody deserves someone who makes them look forward to tomorrow.
I should be sleeping but instead I'm listening to .
Seem to enjoy the Bonmac dripper more than the v60 these days.. Sipping a 50/50 Brazil/ Ethiopian blend to wake up today
yup me too and i also cant wait 4 my bday
#UTSA Athletic Director Lynn Hickey a critical member of the selection committee on this #NCAA selection sunday... this is her last year
It's Gold Card week! Get 20% off your purchases!!
at least the TV time was for something important.
My way is cooler. More designer-y. ;-)
Omfg. I haven't been on in so long. I'm watching the voice right now and I was freaking out. Went on tweet limit on my personal /:
direct msg me sir
Hanging out in Keller waiting for the party to start
Man asked me to make him copies. Um, no. Make them yourself at the *public copy machine*.
betty white's off the rocker ='s lmao i love old people
New to Twitter! Very excited to be here!
No lie, just pity the fool who writes it! ....on second, thought, it might but someone on the map
Rude tellers at the bank are no good.
it was acutally thru the Brighton Store. They called back the next day but still didn't have an answer yet. 2012 Focus 17" rims.
we should leave the blog up, & twitter too. evidence of our project that we presented at a conference. BIG DEAL in the real wrld!
#WIunion activist turned candidate raises $100K for her #RecallFitz campaign. Will be on radio show 5pm CST.
#RememberHow we asked our mothers for advice instead of google?
Well Nebraska is wrong. Nd by the Way. U never answered either of my questions. Lol
Each time is easier nd easier(x
I wish we had earlier in his career. I really thought he cared about public safety. Cops, FF, and LG.
Locals: Society of the Spectacle rocks! If you need glasses GO THERE! Best customer service (Highland Park, LA)
Brb Gonna Go Stare At My Justin Bieber Poster.
straight, packed like usual
No news assignment meeting Mon due to holiday, so it's been rescheduled to TUES @ 5 p.m. (MGC 252). Also, general interest mtg WED!
“: I never get tired of watching Kevin Durant's mixtapes!🏀🏀🏀🏀🏀” try watching Lebron's...
Adam Scott is sexual. I am now really into golf.
My eyes twitching so I can't see. Therefore I can't read 4 books by tomorrow. Idiot teacher expects that much reading in 2 days?
why are you tweeting this to her?
hey! How have you been? Its been a while, what's new with you?
You're amazing
#SometimesIWonder if I'll make it through the hour. #ThenIRealize, that's why there's coffee, silly!
Dream On, Dreamer is so good.
hi, im here too! First workshop of the day
Thank you for the awesome inspiration 's youth poets!
#divaconference Anna Ochs is telling us about Angela Peralta, the "Mexican Nightingale."
Wearing all black on a beautiful spring day. Suck it, life.
anytime after 4
Pad Thai bistro
????? Wen all this happen
made those people life hell wish I left earlier
Apparently I'm a huge slut. Well it's true....
Just finished watching Fireproof with my mom. Awesome movie!!
hanging out you?
We are so excited to welcome Lori Holt Pfeiler as the Associate Vice President of The San Diego Foundation ()!
Seau, btw, is the EIGHTH member of the '94 Chargers Super Bowl team to have died. All of them dead at a young age.
Anyone spot the Mad Hatter singing with Lisa Marie Presley?
For some of us multitasking is just natural, or maybe I just have some sort of disorder.
Absence diminishes small loves and increases great ones, as the wind blows out the candle and fans the bonfire.
I'm glad you noticed(;
dolma's newest location: MARILYN JACKSON'S ACCESSORIES 405-C VANN DRIVE JACKSON, TN 38305 United States
Yes indeed. :)
i hate the new wwe informer (boss)
A small corporation that cannot get a hold of investment funds to to operate their corporation can use accounts receivable factoring.
Added to our fleet this week. Things are definitely moving in the right direction...
Yes yes yes yes!! Bumpus says, "hire staff who do not feel threatened by technology" !! {Very big smile}
seafood shoppe - hands down best crawfish and crab in Houston. Incredible spice. Been a family favorite for years.
C's have never been interested in Blatche? i would trade him for JO in a second!
Pathetic pathetic pathetic
Taxis shouldnt be posted up like the cops
Fee of Women in Military Service for America: self marginalization is an issue. Women need to understand every story is impt
turkey and a loving family :-)
Mark your calendars! 2012 Walk 9am at Liberty Station! Help us raise awareness!
Getting ready for American Whiskey tasting: showing Hirsch, St. George Breaking & Entering, WhistlePig!
Glad we can entertain... All part of Darwinism in action!
“: I'm listening to the wacky sounds of - where the Beatles meet the Addams family... and I'm Wednesday” Thx!
so Joey did you know who really "won" #SweetHomeAlabama or were you in the dark like the rest of us? Are you surprised?
A fool takes no pleasure in understanding, but only in expressing his opinion. Proverbs 18:2
Back home in Seattle. It is raining, although I think it is quite a perfect way to end my stay in the couve.
Last menu I did had abt 12 diff preps for oysters - who knew they could be roasted... and served on toast.
Jovial, enjoys a good conversation, always has free time. Rating: 0/10
oh don't worry me and zoey ate the whole thing!
you're all the way in Scottsdale?!
always academic contexts!
did you go to BLS?
Friends versus associates. A critical distinction that any adult must make. Just reminded of this..
my friend call my mom fat i said your mom so stuip she got lock in a matress stor and slep on the floor lol
Congrats on adding Delgado to the #Noles family ... huge get for the next two years! Keep it up!
Really dont understand what the fuck I did to you 2 to make you completely disown me as a friend?
- Thanks for the follow! Hope to see members of your next mission to Israel on an unforgettable Kol HaOt pgm in Jerusalem!
Now a song about heroin addiction. 'What have I become? ... My empire of dust.'
yes we must stake a claim.
“: Police have confirmed Junior Seau committed suicide.” sad news
Thanks so much for the #ff Hope you have a fabulous weekend in front of you. Let's hope $hitty slip up
I will add gas. Thanks homie
go Blue #masterchefau ... would not be any of you for all the money in the world! Well done everyone
and what did tim say.. what you talked time about me.. :c i fucking hate him.
Drupalcon keynote begins!
"Work hard in silence and let your success make all the noise." :)
I'll try to have a good Monday if you'll Try to Tyler... 
25 cases? ha... I'll talk to Joe tomorrow about it.
A member of a full service national Litigation, Construction and Real Estate practice group.
The Bucks opening night loss to the Bobcats looks worse by the day.
can you help us 2? Thanks
brilliant, profound and hauntingly beautiful-A Monster Calls. My soul has been touched. Thank you, Patrick & the late Siobhan.
Thanks! You too!
I swear facebook “likes” are a popularity contest, wonder if I can buy some
thanks! So glad you like it :)
Picture upload failed
Why are people so slow?
I don't intend that in a mean-spirited way. Baseball just seems to attract a certain kind of flakiness.
Almost done with my classes..which means, YAY! Back to my reviews and back to my writing.
show off!
"Man, I'm single as fuck."
Thumbs f'd up
Apple demos iBooks2 with a biology textbook and lot of interactive features at the Education announcement.
Listening to "taking care of business" with and Yay
clubbing, cigarettes and lottery scratchers. xD
Gorgeous! Love the vibrant purple. Enjoy your trip!
RT : Truth! "When you love what you do, work becomes a #HappyPlace!" Such big smiles :)...
LOVE the people in my life who are so good, kind & make such a difference! They make my heart swell & simply....take my breath away!
I need a vacation so I can get caught up on all of my house work.
Jamaican jerk chicken is on; ride on over and get some!
But the thing is, I could have told you that Ikeda's is the best restaurant between here and Tahoe, knowing NOTHING about you.
They say "Hell hath no fury like a scorned woman" and that's true, but have you ever met a pissed-off Aussie - hell hath no fury - period.
ha ha no and no yes same in every language
With so many "to do's" this #holiday season, how do you stay #motivated to #write ?
Morning... Make it a good one.
Cole Haan Official Site - Shoes Handbags amp Accessories- cole haan nike air
Oh my gosh, like, totally!!!!
The Harder you work during peace the less you bleed in war -Brandon Jennings
Congrats to Drew Brees! One of the most earning and great people in the NFL!
oh halo.
A nine year old just told me he was a tiny little cougar
I did. xD
Painted by bathroom today. Its nice and moody...just like me :')
Go follow
Challenge accepted
she dead weak at dancing on poles lol “: Ion she was driving a charger.... it had to be like a 2010 or sumn”
Already knew Serratore was a college player, but Kyle VanWettering is as well. Kid can definitely play at the next level.
Follow the LJ/SLJ Virtual Summit EBOOKS: THE NEW NORMAL on #ebksmt, and keep up with specific library tracks on #acad, #pub and
Getting excited about the premiere of 100N's pilot episode: "Friday's Cruel Lottery" at investors luncheon this Thursday.
Far Away - Tyga is my jam <3
Of Monsters and Men's new album is quite enjoyable and cheap. I suggest you pick it up.
From moisturizing Shea Butters to Black Soaps made by West African Women Cooperatives Bath & Body uses a...
Yup, we're just off the 5 and on Katella. Thanks for checking us out, we'll be sure not to disappoint.
yeah!! But it's more like any guy, period. Hah
American Eagle is selling film fisheye lens for half off. NOT HAVING MONEY
Loves being busy.
Happy Leap Year Day. To those born on February 29th, Happy Birthday.
The Throwback tonight @ w/ and NO COVER $2 16oz Yings and $3 bombs. Come check out our brand new dance floor!!!
Blokus is also a favorite of and me.
OK:D
Now I Aint Either. Thats not a Probkem I take my Show On the Road Ha U KIDDIN ME?
Lets Go Bears!!!
Ah, well you will be able to pick out her arm then.
I think for my last song I'm mashing Adele with Taylor Swift...
Making up fake rules when there is a substitute teacher.
When interviewed and the host makes a great point or asks great question, say so. The audience will appreciate your generosity.
WTF? I did NOT see that coming! Can't believe Donald fired !!! Should've been Arsenio!
CRAWL to the MALL and BUY MORE SHIT PLEASE....U deserve what U get....NO...online order it!!!!!
Just a reminder Art Litho will be closed on Monday, Sept. 5th. Happy Labor Day Weekend!
I don't no what's better, the two minute commute or Air Force Ones.
This pain:/
you got people thats surround you they gone try they best to down you!!
M Pauly D
words can't describe how much i love thai food.
RT One of the only requirements for greatness is being willing to face the unknown with an AVID faith in yourself.
I was gonna do that !
If you're in DC at CGI U this weekend look for Julia Durham!!! :)
Great time Sunday presenting on grassroots organizing to the National Breast Cancer Coalition
no animals were hurt during that night
I'm at Saltgrass and I'm watching the Bulls play on TV!!!!!!!!! :)
LOL! My challenge was the page numbers
curious as to why you think that... any feedback is appreciated. Thanks!
Still not sure why they took so long. Site looks like they did it b/c they were pressured to, not b/c they wanted to.
happy to help. Cool picture!
#TurnToYou Is An Amazing Song❤c': I Know Pattie's So Proud Of You❤(': I Know I Am❤
“: Thanks for following God. God bless you today and everyday!” Thank you, God bless you each &Every day also.
US economy declined by 20% in first quarter 2012 compared to 2011. Good job Mr. President!
Unconference action plans in the works
Absolutely awesome! Kudos 2 your daughter and U!
Let's not wake up unmotivated, let's be grateful that we got to see another day while others didn't get that opportunity!
awesome Night at Three!!! Below!! Shout out to Krystel, Betnadette and the Air Force for coming out!!!!
I was just called a backseat reader. Damn right! Do the sounds!
Do you have the power to close other offices? Im there....
Can't believe such a young soul has left us. 43 year old Junior Seau RIP.
It is so much better to be moving forward with a plan, than just getting by with no idea of what you're doing .
Icons in the Making Kisses!
your welcome!!:)
playing on ...low key saturday night
The inter generational transmission of poverty has never been greater than now. Helping folks get certifications degrees can help
Babylon Football Cafe 3501 S. Jefferson St. Falls Church, VA 22041, stop in have a beer with us!!! go United!!
Looking into the awesomeness that is Haskell.
hoping to dare
Time change, no. The Day Job, YES. ;)
Op. Ha I'm hip to that.
Do you need some resin for your auto glass repairs? Get your order in now so we can ship it to you before the New Year begins!...
Sweet. How to do exactly that is part of a tutorial I am just finishing up for diythemes.com. Will submit it soon.
Swapped out a 20 yard dumpster in The Heights this morning and bid a pallet trash haul in Brittmore Industrial Park this afternoon!
Earrings🎀 Someday by JB💟 Hunger Games!
“: Tell me, princess, now when did you last let your heart decide? –Aladdin”
ballin' HAM on this
I miss you too:( 2 months* So how's your summer?:)
OH MY GOD I LOVE YOU.
Be who you are and say what you feel because those who mind don't matter and those who matter don't mind.
Don't miss the country lips here tonight, always a knee slappin good time
thanks for tuning in- we should have you on the show sometime!
oh em gee! Really?!
We may not always be joyful, but we should always be thankful!
Morning world
Your check'n out the deep cuts. Will have to give it a look.
That soreness and pain you feel after a good workout at the gym>>>>>>>>>>>
So I guess all the 8th graders are getting their acceptance letters to magnet schools...sad to see my 2016 babies growing up:(
did you shop or find that image?
when are we doing a #blaufränkisch #winechat ? :-)
Douglas Eyman would be a good person for #thatcamp #pub -ers to talk about new forms of peer review / crowd sourcing
If you say you're more excited to see the #Padres play this series, instead of the #Nationals... you have a relative on the Pads.
my dick is on your Picture right now....
Yea I get real emotional over things lol
Got kicked out of Mr Wilson's class -.-
Buying a bar so we can buy everyone a round on the cheap. This will happen, godspeed to us on that.
Dumb... foolish...counterproductive -- all good adjectives to apply to some in Congress pushing to slash Pell grants.
We can jump start your business with fresh leads.
Having church in my car!!
Thanks for the #RT #Mentions and other things that you do. We have a message and we are getting throught TY
Isn't that sponsored by some business group, that didn't release the data just conclusions?
Having a hard time watching #RHOBH this season!
Music is the one thing that gets me in that zone def
The harder the fight, the more glorious the win.
Anyone have any ideas on what should I do tonight?
Ciao bella!
A4: Sad part...ATS is like a box of chocolates...you never know what you're gonna get!
He not bout that!!! TMT ALL DAY!!! RT : How much you got on that?
Beat My Lil Bro In 2K12 I was Goin In on His Ass. #TheGameplayshouldbemorerealistic I Swear that Lebron Be Jumpin over everybody on da game
Realizing that everything you tweet about is 100% true
Tell me how we supposed to stay friends when you got a bunch of feelings that you don’t show.
One time I called a suicide hotline and they asked me if I could call back a little later due to high call volume... No joke
Thanks for coming out tonight! Next show Sept 26th Middle East Up. Details soon.
I Believe I Can Fly!!!!!!
#2BYGD Chapter 4 'Friend Me' : Online networks are meaningless w/o real world follow up.
something about "multi-touch" sounds a little dirty, In a good way, though.
Glad we could help! What did you have?
They have square watermelons in Japan
It’s called The Planet of the Suffering Fools.
Holiday Special at www.blpdx.com and check out our sweet Gift Card Holiday Special~ Be sure to come by 1713 NE 15th for your Holiday Cheer
good morning to u too
wow I have 523 FOLLOWERS, just as many as FOREST GUMP had, when he kept RUNNING AND RUNNING AND RUNNING AND RUNNING!!!..... lol
Cant wait for the NBA #Playoffs .
crazy! RT : Bodemaster set the five fastest fractional splits in #KyDerby history
Open Mic Full Band or Solo Tues Texas Mist on 183 at 71 (Ben White) Full Stage with PA and Lights. 1115 Bastrop Hwy (183) Austin, TX 78702
not only that, what happened to the DJ in rap groups? Where's the scratching & mixing? There's no creativity anymore.
Tonight Back by Popular Demand: Party Band Twang Dragons and Chef Gregs Famous Fried Catfish! Let's get it started! JC
Droop also easier to spell. Lol.
Interesting new Twitter look. Things change pretty fast when you don't logon for 2 days.
The white girls in here talmbout they Ridin Round & They Gettin It!! Lol
this for all these nigga out here if you discriminate ..... then you masterbate kmsl!!
nothing. Lol u?
Me too 😥. Grr. I want to go there so bad. At Canterbury were already starting to figure out where we wanna go to college:/
happy birthday! We met at Ace hotel poshparty:-)
Lets GO KNICKS the Refs need to call some FOULS!
Individualism is one of tolerance's best friends.
675456: You're super pretty! And you seem nice(: Tweet me sometime!
St. Paul-Johnson 94 - Durango 75. Scrappy game. We play tomorrow @ 4pm
WHO IS TOO TRUST WHEN YOU HAVE OVER 1002 BIBLES THIS IS NOT WORTH MY LIMITS
Why is my timeline everyone is speaking French.. I mean I know what some are saying..but still
The Brewers are running a season long #wheresRickie promotional campaign.
Oddly have been mistaken for both Bret Bielema and Barry Alvarez today. Sorry to disappoint folks! Cheer loud for the #badgers anyway!
we are talking ideas now. can you oovoo for ten minutes?
texting much better than smoke signals. I'm just fed up with trying to amass as many Facebook friends as I can.
#i swear to you, i will never forget you:))
End of the World prediction has a lose-lose ending. If right, no one around to praise his accuracy. Now that he's wrong, he's a big idiot!
I just am in disbelief. Matt Kemp is playing the best baseball I have ever seen. Carrying the #Dodgers on his back. So clutch.
Never make an attempt to reason with ur shortcmings they will never be resolved with excuses
So, she expects me to be out all night. Well, let me try and get the fuck on then. Lol.
It never ends
White Flint Station is REOPENED - single tracking continues
Obedience & Faithfulness!!!!!!
I love Disney! I was at Disneyland in March & they were out of the Jedi Training t-shirt I wanted for my son. I was able to call and order.
and to Washington DC for a concert and meet-n-greet! (: #AustinToDC 24
Cannot do the doppelganger meme because I can't find a picture of the girl from the Dove deodorant commercial from a few years ago.
Thanks for the mention!
How do you keep from getting sick with all of this weather change?
I mean sorrryyy ;o
#TriviaMonday @ 8pm, warm up now! Who said: "When you are a man, sometimes you wear stretchy pants in your room. It's for fun."
i have this friend, Tom. every time Tom calls me, there is a turn signal in the background. WHAT are you DOING with the TURN SIGNAL, Tom???
80 shades of bright red, the new erotic novel sweeping the nation
Wish I had a girl :(
I have been rocking my beard since I was 17
im tweetin on the downsides of these alpine climbs!! when done here..im gonna develop a #westernskillet flavored
About to make a pretty massive update to the website & about to publish a blog site.
~ RT : We still have reservations available for Easter Brunch... Call and make your reservations now 202.661.2700
Working on my portfolio
Joint birthday party?
i want to! i miss the north west :(
I should be the one slandering the Lakers and Heat but us (Spurs) don't really care to get into all that. We're busy winning ball games.
Are you here too?
Where are you to be cold like that?
and during Diane Sawyer's impassioned tribute to Mr. Schafly - she called him Herbert though her prompter said Hubert. #doh!
Follow me if u r cool, fucken cheesy...
Do we get any push up the middle?
Dragon boat festival!!
i know fell asleep..... lol
u still in osky?
#nw she's the man
Woo!!!! Thanks for the follow gang! We set up our collection bin last week!
California i MISS YOU! Ill be back son :)
You got it! Let us know if you don't get Monday's edition.
RT : Those doubting validity of food insecurity #s are encouraged to visit food banks, volunteer, talk with families there...
Free coffee was Tuesday.
sleep sleep and sleep that should do the trick
Ive been great!! How u? RT : lol how you been?
Omg, are you at LOEX? I'm so jealous! Was just following the loex tag and saw you here!
I Miss You And Your Still Beautiful!!!
Parsley is an excellent thing to munch on in between meals. Not just is it good for you in terms of vitamins
Haven't even seen in a week and he can't even go to dinner with me what the fuck.
chris brown in the car
Families are like fudge... mostly sweet with a few nuts. ~Author Unknown
AW I love you too. :)
Visiting #ASU Libraries archival project to process & catalog six bilingual collections on Mexican-American history in the Southwest.
so should 46, 19, 17, according to most. Need more from everyone.
no arrests or suspects at this time in last night's shooting that sent five teens to the hospital
Think somewhere tropical, think tropical.. NOPE not working! :(.
You're very welcome, ! Thanks so much for the referral!
But I wanted to do hoodrat stuff with friend!
I need a trip to Cali and quick.... well when it warms up
she wasn't like going hard but I mean shaken baby syndrome and all that shit? Anyway on a lighter note I miss you guys haha
hello there
And the dream was that she was in Hollywood. And that Arthur supported her ambitions.
Haha I love my Droid too, not sure if I wanna make the iPhone switch or get the newest Droid, I guess o can look at price and see
or any packers jersey, anywhere, anytime....acceptable??
Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm - Ralph Waldo Emerson
gullys was jumpin a lil bit i might swing back through there next event they got
Anybody who watches three games of football in a row should be declared brain dead.
Forgot to tag the sacrifice
Save time and money. Let Nivula Innovative Designs help design, build, and deploy your site today! Mention Facebook Customer Code FB2011!
Hehe! I will attempt at getting pics! It's hard taking pics from the diehard section. Hehe!
I am not even from the UK, but the Conner Saunders story is just so incredibly sad :(
I Think someone named Austin carter Mahone Should Follow Me!!!!!!
#ThingsiLoveToSee Elderly Couples ..
like not me? Exceptionally?
1 of our favorite furry feline friends (say THAT 12 times fast!) just went to the vet. First time since his nuggets were chopped.
Good Morning Everyone:)
yes man.
haha same here
Pretty sure that's in violation of something. City Ordinance...
is Mrs. Chapman your bus driver?
interesting to know
If your goal doesn't take your breath away, its not big enough.
RT : Lunch lady Q & A going up tomorrow morning! It is a terrific post. Very long, but you'll want to read every single word.
Who wakes up one morning & tells themselves "Today I want to smoke some crack"?
Having some technical difficulties
39% Of Consumers Plan To Look To Social Networks Before Buying
I was impressed by the awesome beer selection & great staff recommendations at Bayview's Cafe Centraal. Definitely going back.
Follow Us ! Support #TeamJayTate !
We'll probably get to around 8! See you there!
I don't chase these lames , I just chase my dreams We ridin 'round so dirty in this whip that's so clean
Cool, I just accidentally kicked a blind man's walking stick and a ton of people saw me do it.
Only Like 6 People In My Class , This S*** Crazy !!!
Great to visit with George Benson today before the game.
we really are quite talented!
That is awful! Best of luck getting it back.
IAN! hope all is well...working on getting the band back into place, and a new record.
Michelle Russo: When Architects write user stories addressing tech debt they should write using terminology everyone understands .
A Bulls player get hurt every damn game. Ya'll training staff suck lol
Yes. RT : They should have a special lottery where the $ goes to arts programs and they let artists (me) design scratch-off tickets
i will(:
": Changing my Attitude is a must"
People keep pushing "tips and tricks" to get blogs read and noticed - try being more "transparent" and "authentic" - it's all you need
Thank god.
If the mlb playoffs started today, in the AL it would be the wild card winner (TB vs. Toronto) taking on the Tigers and the O's vs. Seattle.
4:30 was way to early to wake up.
maybe a week and a half. We'll see
Stop by and see us booth #4375 at Coverings - The Ultimate Tile + Stone Experience.
A trifle consoles us, for a trifle distresses us
making jerseys backstage lol
aw we gone miss u bo!!!
following spree ?? if you do do this . Please follow me ?!? <3 Pretty please ??? :)
Just amazing! The Magnificent 7 strikes again! Wish I could of watched. RT : FINAL: DePaul 77, West Virginia 63
Its a shame they had a rat in the house
I miss your legs all over mine when I'm trying to sleep #bedtalk :)
Watching a webseries that will be featured on our new network launching early 2012. We are actively seeking new shows! #
OSI fellowship application submitted!
thanks for following!!
I'm surprised at some of the things people argue about. I enjoy relaxing to much for all that.
All that I know I learned after I was thirty. Georges Clemenceau
Love it! #Orioles RT : Yep, can't stand that a**hole!
♬ Thanks so much for following Nia Have a fabulous weekend. ♬
like really!
I'm hearing an alarm go off and it's not in this house.. That's one loud alarm clock!!
Just reviewed an excellent study, w/ solid argument and study design. Wish I could've written that, & hope to see it in print soon.
Sorry, tweeps. I was hacked but *think* I have fixed it...
I need to rethink the people I associate with
People ask me that ALL the time...
I thought i could count on you. Guess not.
#moodle 2.2. mobile app will let you download course content to your mobile device to read/view
Greg Bailey formally announces his presidential campaign for 2012.
WE ARE NOW FOLLOWING!!! RT : can we get a
#Google. Famazing. Thanks to Les Paul & props to the 'sha.
Did you see last night's episode of #Shameless? Steve's back in the show. I'll be in next week's episode. See you next week
Good news is that for the first time in 5 games we somehow made it through a whole game w/o anyone getting hurt!
strong sermons are the ones that make me research the bible to understand. They aren't the easy ones to listen to.
"What is Love"
Where Are You Moving :o
Summer Nights is awesome.
lol I fell asleep like I knew I would.
Please Judges or Jimmy pick the Penguin song for P2
Who's coming to #Spectrum this weekend? Do you think it'll be a good show for business or the world's BEST temporary art museum?
treated me right on my visit to Miami. Thanks for celebrating my graduation with me!!
Golden Colt
Legs hurt!
i find the sarah phillips story fascinating, though i must confess i dont understand 1 word of it //glad i'm not the only one
a well deserved break. Thanks Learning Times and Adam for hosting the Virtual conference. Really good sessions.
Actor Tom Savini of "Night of the Living Dead" fame, completed work on Cartoon Network's "Aqua Teen Hunger Force".
When you become mentally convinced that you can make a come-back from any adversity, then all of your creative forces will come to your aid
I was very disappointed at the cashier at Little Caesar's. He was neither hot nor ready. --Michelle
Happy Mommy's Day<3 💋
Go to www.nationstates.com and try it out! It is a fun game where you make your own country! me and let me know if you like it!
One of the best uses of your time is to increase your competence in your key result areas. -Brian Tracy
Traffic Tweet brought to you by #TacoBell: accident Southbound Brodie at Slaughter
just put up a link on the home page of my website to the Kirstie Alley video for all to see!
Turkeyfest begins! All is right with the world.
Eddie Redmayne for Burberry...it cant get better
Just got back home... MUST SLEEP
Thanks I will publicly announce the install. Thought it might be today but finalizing layout with owners. Hope you stop by.
mention me i followed u
Bought the #iPad3. Seems to live up to the hype thus far. Sending this tweet from the iPad3.
Just knowing that you're hurting, makes me hurt too.
Who else hates Mondays?
knock knock... Who's there... To...to who...to whom!!! Lol #chessey lit joke lol please follow me!!
When something you Want/Desire says 'No'...AWESOME!
Anyone have #TheHungerGames on Kindle to "Share" with my sister?
Husby said we're not wasting a babysitter on a silent movie, Best Picture or not.
I guess I've always needed to be needed by someone. It's a comforting feeling being under someone's thumb.
When This Song Come On I'm Spending Money
Happy with the win, but I wish our "leader" would start playing like one consistently
I am BEYOND irritated right now
yo follow back..
Seems unlikely I'll be there any time soon, but sure, thanks.
Headed to PaleyFest 2011 Family to see Phineas & Ferb with my nephew and niece. And then an afternoon of Hollywood sights.
:)....I'm so happy my husband has left a couple for you to enjoy!
Can't have one's cake and eat it too
"u made my days better just by 1 word,I love u l'll see u tomorrow because I couldn't live my life without u
Good god, is there anything that NATO isn't going to complicate this weekend?
...it's fair to say that we always think of ACH in its global context and not as a regional DH association. [-]
lol good point. Im gonna coplain to the page i got it from haha
why that one?
Fingers crossed we can join everyone at Farragut Friday with our new spring menu =)
Tattoos tomorrow! So excited :)
I guess that explains a lot
- LOVE Would love to see them at the Casbah in San Diego this week!
Q. How are your blood sugars? A. Numerous. Varying. Fair. Questionably accurate.
A few hours until Ft. Laurderdale Corporate Run
Ha! I'm going to go promptly drink about fifteen Dr. Peppers.
Can't wait to see 'em!
Thank you and Happy Thanksgiving! RT: Happy Thanksgiving to you and your families. Looking forward to the opening
Happy Friday!
I think you mean backcourt...and I wouldn't say "far better" however I'm a fan as well. And these were chosen before tourney
Haha. I just saw a sign for an apartment for rent. It read: Luckserious Apt 1 Bethroom 1 Bathroom $550 Lmfao
#MyPastRelationships Have helped me to really appreciate what I have now ♥.
TIP: write down what you do every hour to really stay focused and on task.
Do be do be do
No cuz that's my class. I would see you. :3
Yeah good point
Let's just all admit Soccer is better than basketball! (:
Welcome to the dark side.
Sitting at Top of the East in Portland, ME enjoying a cocktail and the foggy view.
i'm planning on going to 2 yoga classes this weekend
3:38 p.m ah my least favorite time of the day!
FYI there will be a post conference gathering at McSorley's on 15 East 7th Street New York, NY 10003. Please join us
About to release more #spas, #salons, #fitness studio all apart of Texas Spa and Salon Month! So excited. Have you bought your card yet?
you are pretty.
I feel the love when I see my Vet-that makes me a happy pet!
yes I am
Hahhhah made my boyfriend watch the notebook with me last night... Lydia Martin moment :) ♥
You hear that sound off in the distance? That's the sound of the fail boat coming to pick up the Brewers
Hard to believe Cocaine still drug of choice for adult Americans. Seem like the cone of silence keeps the knowledge down but we can detect
dancing around like an idiot to Strip by breezy. lol i need a life.
"I base most of my fashion taste on what doesn't itch." -- Gilda Radner
This could be the worst week! Either I've worked here to long or I need a strong drink or a years vacation!
I can't stop thinking abt the Pokemon champion stripped of his title because pooped in a hotel lobby.
I apologize steven. so far it has been a great trade for you. can i call you theo epstein?
I am too young to feel this old.
it was such a waste of my time
What color bracelet do you have?
I am extremely SORE from last night lol good times tho ;)
CONGRATS!!! Got married 4 years ago today - and she still talks to me!
Our most fundamental needsfor love, understanding, encouragement, supportpermeate every cell.
I called this over a year ago, sticking to it... Tebow will be a DOLPHIN.. Phins will overpay
We should get someone to run our facebook that will post clever things and maybe someone will actually like us.
And the signs are up!
You should ask people a question related to the song. Something about themself, like, "are you precocious?"
yes I'm okay :)
I loved Madam!
yeah, boy, u know it! Brang that geetar and some good ideas! (Remind precious to bring an air mattress also) :) !!
I agree, very festive! It's almost like you planned it that way! ;-)
Jason Nelson- Shifting the Atmosphere on repeat all day!
Some Mondays require special circumstance to get going: Quad Latte is in order this am. Happy pre-Super Bowl week.
#3wordsforyou I want you . :/
Thanks for the follow - glad we connected. Happy Easter!
Calling it night...
The lightning-bug is brilliant, but he hasn't any mind He stumbles through existence with his head-light on behind. - from The L
They call it the “greatest 11 days of Summer!” Stay tuned for details on our ticket package!
agreed. I've seen audiences at my shows really have a great experience. That's of value regardless of how on trend it is
About to see The Brother Sister Plays.
": Check up on it!" Tht was my jam
school bro
I try but I just dont feel the fun anymore. It hasn't been fun since Christmas, and emotionally significant since Valentine
who was the most famous 1950's saxophone player? go.
just now saw this. That calorie count seems way off. Heh
It's all better now
hah I'm glad I'm not in APush
USC lost to Stanford last I checked...
So proud of my fellow UP Church Choir Member Kim Yarbrough on The Voice 2!
uggh, -__-. lemme find out who did it, ill whoop ass. its ok, not your fault. :/
thanks;D
loverly. Lit committee hashed over Pulitzer mess (fiction)
How many times can someone hurt you, and get away with it...
This got a little park and recreation going tonight..
Amy was cracking up watching me pull my hair out!
no shit. Just starting that myself. Wiskey Travels. Take it with you to Starbucks or something.
#AtJustinsParty the best thing to wear is a customized Justin T shirt!!!!
What the word of the day?
Hey thanks! We're kind of in love with that happening too :-)
I saw 's tweets yesterday about models. I've been enjoying the show from my treadmill most days :)
#FF TY for the follow, Lorelai, & greetings from Florida. Happy to follow back.
lmao yes, i was thinking burgundy not like BAM red, my bad
's follower count is going up exponentially by the minute!
If you see this will you PLEASE follow me?(:
Thanks for the follow, Paul! I look forward to visiting Dubrovnik this year, let's have a coffee. Pozdrav!
sweet shit. I live in Minneapolis. Let me know if you guys play anywhere on the cities yeah?
we'll still have to do that photo adventure. I'm counting on it.
can't send you a DM reply. Are you guys HT participants? Hoping NLM joins in the next year.
Let's go...with my family~.
holy moly today is frustrating... ready for it to be over..
you ROCKED !
Masters Home Improvement Uses Oracle Retail Platform to Support New Business Growth
I'm chillin w. My bros & they friends at this block party .
thanks guys!!!! I can't wait to see you guys either!!!!!! Its gonna be fun!!! Hopefully....
Remember, any tile can be used on a wall, but only floor rated tiles can be used on a floor.
milky coffee. paper. pen.
Morning tweeters! Today's going to be a great one...for me at least.
Red Letter News??
packing, packing and more packing
I hope he does too(:
Maybe it's just me but I wonder if will ever rip off the created zombie types from Resident Evil and ruin the show.
Thankful for my business and my very shrewd customers. Thank you #Houston !!!
My girls surprised me this morning with the NOOKcolor from Barnes & Noble. Can't find the new book from but still very Cool!
It was right then lol sorry bout that, my phone stopped working soon after I wrote that...but somehow it's back from the dead!
counting the days to #techbowl!
It is the duty of the educated few to fulfill the legitimate aspirations of the unfortunate," many. ~H.I.M. Haile Selassie I
Is it 5:00? I WANT TO PAINT!
I WISH MY CO-HOST, MATTHEW PAUL JONES, WOULD CREATE A TWITTER ACCOUNT! ALL HE HAS IS FACEBOOK!
Okay so Freddie Mitchell started doing the "belt" in 2003. Aaron Rodgers still does it better.
then again, what they describe in that article doesn't sound all that 'cultural'
big ups!
Shape of Things by Adam Hood
so it has to be true! How exciting
Hawks need a goalie. Please stan bowman stop the pain.
That feeling when you feel like you're drifting apart from a really close friend :(
Summer Reading List: Rules for Radicals
Me, too! That's what I was trying to convey. Looks much chewier w/ chocolate marbling.
GUESS WHO'S BCK....
Woo Hoo #Kings take them out
I'm sorry, my Show Choir Critiquing brain cannot shut off while watching this show.
is just soo smart ((:
Math; B. History; B. Science; B. English; B. Health; B. Read 180; A. omg. lovely. #AtLeastI'mActuallyPassing
it's an NBA playoffs commercial. Which is kind of the crudest form of targeted advertising
the advanced learning center..aka senior senior or smart people classes...
Well the drawing is fantastic, and we love that you love our incense! Thanks Zach!
I have a phone interview for my big job Monday. Is it weird that my first thought was "I have to lose 20 lbs for this"? Sigh.
Some class Is playing today was a good day
Don't forget to find us on Facebook and LinkedIn! You don't want to miss out on any of the opportunities!
where would the startup world be w/o interns & assistants?!
thanks for a great event today!
Aw is 23 years old this Saturday:) love you christopher x
( though it was a fun commission I hope I can show you guys soon. Only had time to do line art, wish I coulda colored it)
uh I thought I was following you on instagram! Im justrosystylin ill find u! See u Wednesday!
What a drag, Bulls.
Convincing my little brother that nipples are alien satellites and tell them exactly where you are like a GPS.
Remember that you are never alone. God is always with you. (a2ib4ue) Let's get it :-)
You can bang your head on my walls (BHAHAHAHA)(That sounds funny).
Chopped blowin blue cheese
umm "Anything" and my favorite album has to be "All For You"
Playing with elegance - The Border Mail
Kyle the best things in life are found in the cookie jar go get you some thanks for the follow andsupport checkout
We heart Joey Arias! At BESsy for din din!
Don't name your newborn Phil.
Raftering, for certain.
People don�t buy with their head but with their heart.
My little brother has a twitter 👀 follow him!
yo man call me 5453059 got some great news!
Thts wht I like to hear! RT : Lots of WOMEN ride motorcycles and wear helmets. I'm one of them! :)
Only a few nights left of Marc trio!!!!
The Best Show. RT : Get ready! Tonight LIVE IN THE STUDIO comics superstar ! 8-11 PM EST! wfmu.org! RT this!
TYLER POSEY!!!!!!! YOU NEED TO TWEET a HAPPY BIRTHDAY!!!!!
Barbara Staiffer doing a great job representing NMNH! Muse awards
Landed, completely by chance, in what could be the best kebab joint in the western hemisphere. The place isn't pretty, but Obama's been here
Love their pulled pork!
will be listening to bittersweet symphony all day
beat my first A rank
no like -Abby
r u still mad at me?
get one of those bikes with big plastic floating tires and just pedal across the harbor.
Building on my list for a studio/workshop is for sale at Damen & Bowmanville. Buy it for my birthday, I’ll totally let you use my band saw.
Thee best episode was the 3rd episode of the 3rd season cuzz rebecca was there!;)
Here comes the Rays.
Because he's still 7th in the world, the golfing public still loves him, and if he's much worse the books will be too vulnerable
DAMN YOU! Ha ha ha ha
Ever have a day when you just can't get off the couch?
Oh, my bad. Thought it was Celtic vs Rangers.
:O HAPPY BIRTHDAY!
I think your acct got hacked.
Any truth to the rumors of Vick coming to the Bills? Your offense woud be sick with TO and Vick! WOW!
When Martin Luther King was engaged in his movement, some of these people's ancestors were Dixiecrats, vigilantes, and wishing ill on him
"Cabin in the Woods." Huh.
That last tequila shot and I are NOT friends, right ?!?
Checking every day is even more important if you have nerve damage or poor blood flow
Who has no arms, no legs and hides under a pile of leaves? . . . Russell
Something is not better than nothing. Call/e-mail your US Rep and urge them to vote NO on Waxman-Markley. It's not the answer.
Agility without fortitude is fragility.
Sup babe!! Wuz hood? U still n Tampa?
it's cool. Tomorrow at 10:30. Can ya make it??
You know is gayer than us all.
Orlando bound today for #IBS2012!
how about for good behavior you work on my mailing projects? I'm dying over here!
Ladies, get your beauty sleep!
no different color shoe strings in these air force ones
Shows they're probably putting a lot of effort into making it a great Android app, not just another iOS port that doesn't fit.
Thanks! I hope your day is yee too! :)
What is this I'm cn'g poll shwng Mitt up w/women. Really? Women. WTF?
summer tour then I'll take it braces or not. :)
Q: how did you become famous ? A: I have a manager who worked for Ariana Grande and went from there (:
Ah! Well that was an invigorating book discussion
Corpse is still awaiting reanimation.
When busted his ass today!>>>>>> lol
what's good?
Anyone ever read "The Jungle" by Upton Sinclair? It's 105 years old but still resonates so loudly...wow.
Previous photo is of the #bluebird (which is ironically purple) and the #snowprincess ! I also potted a #strawberry plant!
im unfollwing annoying ass ppl.. and not the ppl who write alot. its the ppl who are always putting depressing ass tweets..
she is. She misses her baby
Really? Amy is going to do a podcast? Sounds like a great idea!
haha its just gonna be a whole birthday weekend with all my favorite people
If I want him I can have him
Lol I mean I would've even brought over the Bacon.
I had it turned off earlier so I could sleep... Did you call me?
Concrete Blonde at the Neptune. It's been a couple of weeks without live music :-)
the 2004 Hidden Ridge was very lush & had a very nice mouth feel. Expressive dark fruits & benefited from age. Great wine.
aww well I hope i get to meet u one day
Yes they were RT : these were sum good days
You have only been on a cruise for a day and I miss you tons already
ABD anyone but
Let's go Sidney, let's go Pens!
Thank you jordan (: I'll deff let ya know !!
For two seconds till TIP went in on his whole life
(i like the idea behind this more than the real answers, actually)
A real-time world demands a real-time agency.
6:50 pm and & Scott Shipley look great in the broadcast booth! US Olympic Trials
Happy thanksgiving to all.
I really cannot wrap my head around GOP thinking. I really can't.
now darlene cavalier is talking about engaging citizens in society. Outreach to public. Sciencecheerleader.com
it is a nice picture of downtown on the site though...
had chocolate chile cornbread there last year - ROCKED MY WORLD.
so pretty sarah (:
Come on Kobe lets get dis money SON!
GO RUNNERS! Get us to the dance....AGAIN!
One proposal signed & delivered. Expecting 2 more shortly!
I freakin hate my sister!!!
that's real good
Soo this walking in the cold and slush is bullshit. #cold #annoyed need a beer, tv, and my hot tub
I hope tonight is as good as it was last night!
I've do that nearly daily.
some guys are just something else..
”forever & always” and ”do us apart” aren't related to each other, btw. Two different tats.
Why is this happening to me in my own house and in my own room?!?!... I have no friends and I wanna move somewhere else but here!!!!!
Who wants to go see #Avengers with me??
My #RumChata Milkshake brings all the boys to the yard?? :)
Winter jam at conseco :)
Ministry's new album, "Relapse", out tomorrow!
Oh how I wish I was at Hartsfield-Jackson to see you!
Please Follow Back ! (: and imma see you Aug 3rd cant wait ! (: ily to you
hows that going
Germany got its butt kicked, that is the only difference. Whites in the Americas exterminated millions.
“: Here we go watching a scary movie all by myself!! #foreveralone” #foreveralonebuddies ^_^
Pssst...are you listening? One FREE mimosa for all mamas on Sunday PLUS $5 off breakfast pizzas.
I think there's more interest in research dollars than undegraduate tuition.
2.) Saw an 80 y/o woman at 8:35pm driving while on her cell phone WITH NO HEADLIGHTS ON. So yeah, think about that next time driving @ night
good to know. hope everything goes smoothly for you guys
Leaf -A$AP <3
aw, congrats to Kramer!
I saw you at the top of Jan at 10 mins plays i worked on. Did you come to see and my glory hole play?
u rock
summer is here & so is dry skin for all u desert climates out there.Aveeno Daily Moisturizing Lotion is quick absorbing and lasts all day!
wait until you have six kids you'll be puttin shoe polish on the Lowes Chevy windows too
#FF sexy ass
We're on our way to Edge Fest 2012. Woot!
Fred Jackson got a $3M signing bonus on the same day that 32nd pick David Wilson got a $3.3M signing bonus. Sums up the veteran RB market.
Ok no more texting my Clipper fan friends. I'm done jinxing.
Ha! If any writer had hoopdedoodle it was Steinbeck! Back then he could use 2 pages to describe a road!
Finna call it a night, I needs my energy fa them kids str8 up no lie... I luv em but they a handful :-) !!!
I think the A/C is stuck on "arctic".
great day in the Falls today!
we're on #teamfollowback. Do we exist to you?
'build an instrument' hm i will build because he is a sexy instrument !
I break hearts: #Leo Your heart is broken frequently, mostly because your partners find it too difficult to keep in step with you
Hope u r feeling better. Ignore the idiots. This city is behind you!
right now?!?
I'm looking forward to meeting y'all here in Atlanta tomorrow for the COA Prep Course! We're going to have fun and learn alot!
"Constructive criticism" my ass.
": u r on DA late bus if it is the jamburrito food Truck...." lol ok here is my tardy card...... damn!!!
You have to tell me what program you use after picnik closes...cuz that's the site I use to edit photos.
If you're in thee Madison area, stop in on Doty St for a HopSconsin Imperial Red brewed w/
Don't get fucking smart with me waking me up telling me something I don't want to hear.
Parting is all we know of heaven and all we need to know of hell.~ Emily Dickinson
your always welcome you know that, as long as you wear the deepest V you have.
RT : now following-; ---->>following back!
At the laundromat.
If you haven't checked out yet, you MUST! There's no better place to be...trust me.
sure! :) Love you so much too, cutie! :) xoxo♥
help me get support in DC for #chia to help out your fellow Aggies and students across the country!
How's it goin? Are you still at ub?
why do i always fall for your type ?
That's fantastic. Can't wait to hear it... and can't wait to see you and E on Saturday!
Was laughing so freaking hard at the camp fire that I literally peed my pants. Going to change now...
Sleepy time. Nighty night, world.
I'M NOT BLACK >=O I'M PUERTO RICAN & IRISH ! [No Offense to my fellow African-Americans) I just HATE when ppl Get my Nationality Wrong !
I would love to know who thot that opening a recorded call w/ "Do not hang up" was a good way to get someone to do anything but that.
no worries. I ordered at a bar so no recipe. Replace all sour cream & cheese with coconut product is all I know
I cant wait to leave el paso! I cant stand it here i hate this place! I'm never coming back to live here NEVER!
im so lost.. What are you lmao'n at lol
oh you tweetn off an iPad
Family Guy>>>
I got the Bulls by 10 tonight, and I'm predicting John Lucas the third will out play John Wall.
Sorry, meant are doing. We want to use social media connect with all our fans. How are we doing?
I'm #notinterested in a fine chick who aiint got a damn thiing to talk about. 411 hoe!!! Yu ain't the only. Good lookiin bitch in LA. WORD!
Ruining my mood just thinking about school tomorrow.
going to bed!
Looking for cutting edge high school equipment and applications for Science labs. Any suggestions?
100% on my second law midterm... maybe I am heading into the wrong profession?
watching Bring it On ... x)
thank you though i'm glad you're still coming. will you tell me what time we need to get you, or do you want to take the bus?
I love that song!!
GO PACK GO! GREENBAY PACKERS BABY!
I miss you to!! "Hip hip hop hippotnanumus. Damn you! You give him all the easy ones!!" Okay will do!:)
Does anyone else think that the Metro PCS commercials are incredibly racist?
Honesty is the best policy - #decoded. Simple and effective
I thought #gooddeeds was a good movie
What's with all the red admiral butterflies? They are everywhere this spring. Yes, I had to go to the shelves and look them up.
thanks...update?
RT : NFL announces Sept. 5 season opener will be Cowboys at Giants.
It's drizzle, my nizzle!
#rip #pimpc the game miss u
i want to write lyrics all over my walls
hahah aw, well ya know i would want to!
EcoSheet pitching at #techscout in London. Recycling waste plastics into an alternative to plywood. Great concept.
sometimes i wish i was that person you keep subtweeting about...
Recruiting big time coffee lovers for what? I do enjoy my coffee.
Wow. Half a beer in and I already can't type.
no I'm not
what should i do for a cracked iphone screen? HELP HELP HELP!
You win. Funniest friend all day. Hell - that one might win for the whole month. Thanks for the smile. I needed that today!!
Yes. This. (, you should start putting together testimonials!)
is the Bomb, and that has the funniest tweets ever!☇ ♥
The freshmen boys in my history class are comparing their no-shave-november "beards". I'm trying so hard not to laugh
i know it's so close
Harlo's looking for a contract WordPress developer! #PHP #Wordpress Drop us a line if you think you've got the goods!
Oh my
Yup, that's my bishop back there :)
Minutes pass. Hours fly. Days go by slow. Weeks are fast. Years are forever.
So that should be your goal. Put others in charge of the day to day?
its anon so there's no context! everyone's protected when I OH you know! ;)
Alright #SKCnation its time to go to work, send all the good vibes you got to our boys up north!
Im thinking bout getting another one
Yeah, I'll have another beer
CM Punk vs Chris Brown hm. Beat his ass Punk he deserves it!
stupid wonka don't know nothinn
Awesome #Chicago show last night ! Thanks to all that came. I'll be back there next week Wed. from 7-10 pm.
“: sprinkle toast for everyone!!! Happy birthday Matt!” thank s Brad!
signing into my #Verizon and it offered me the #ipadhd I think #Verizon is saying I need one
yes i am
sorry you can't have my boyfriend.
Happy happy joy joy happy happy joy happy happy happy joy joy!
We'll give it a listen. Thanks for the mention.
that's very true. i do eat all the food in sight typically lol.
Got Liquid Relaxation in goodie bag in NYC - High Fructose Corn Syrup? Into Trashcan. Shame - looked interesting.
haha nope ...one twitter moron earlier...and the one I just retweeted.
welcome to twitter jgun
aw that's so sad...
Started the day with a latte run - 90 min coastal followed by a soy chai, now lets get out there and feed some folks! www.thetreasurebox.org
yea it was awesome
Just agreed to play the part of a "dancing pink butterfly"
Going to be such a great event! We hope you have a wonderful time Katy. Thanks again for using ShowClix :)
I am in love with 's newest album Modern Love. If you haven't checked it out you should!
Street Fighter II
i thnk i should be a rapper lol hit me up doe
I'd rather live in dreams.
Countdown to go home begins now
I love it too! Unlike some people (biebs)...John legend didn't ruin one of Mariah's Christmas songs.
You rock. Thanks a bunch!
Experience the benefits of Google Calendar for fast and professional ...
I really hope so!
What Happened to VH1? - The Root
One more week to show we value the #environment over greed. #StopSDGEPowerlink Monday March 7!
I GOT MY JOB TODAY GOD IS SO GOOD!!
Case of the mean reds averted by loud music and a killer sunset
Frozen Yogurt Follow Friday!
Only one student mentioned my Twitter activity in the evals. Everyone else focused on aspects of the course itself.
RT : Why wasn't I using OneNote before to organize jobs & cover letters? Much easier than opening up 10 documents to find what I ...
OMG, can't look at any more photos tonight. Eyes exploding. Happy with last night's shoot though.
RT : I like to celebrate the Ides of March by stabbing a Caesar salad to death. RT
what is your facebook page?????
live music at 6, then a different band from 1030-1230. Free pub crawl between us and the other bars in walkers point all night!
Happy Columbus Day! Yes, we are open!
Steppin out tonight
This chick always tweeting people. Like no.
Umm , like really they're makinn me tweet
Who's coming out for Stick Men tonight? Should be a good time, these guys will not disappoint!
Not that anyone asked me but Kendall Wright, WR Baylor, will the Denver Bronco's first round draft pick tonight.
Thanks Great to have you there! And make sure to follow my brother on twitter too!
Crazy how a little sentance can change ur life
Can't go wrong with nunchuks RT Wondering - celebrating XX birthday tomorrow...what could be appropriate gift??
thx dat means so much i met this boy named JAKE and wanna go out with me
Blacked out !
It be the jerk guys that be the ones having daughters. Best observation of the day.
I'm frm Xyleme & saw your tweets. Was wondering if I could be of help & connect you to # of integrators who have evaluated LCMSs
Good win tonight for the Sharks. 3-1.
“ want my sister to make you one of the team shirts for the mud run?” yes tell her I will pay her for it:)
Saw a police officer today using what looked like an iPhone to record the testimonial of the person he'd pulled over on the highway.
Finals today.. summer Reading... New Horizon's Report! Go ! Good information future technology integration!
Gorgeous 48 yrs old Clinique make-up counter lady tells me she wears pharmacy-brand lipstick-- for over twenty years.
Is any company making #TeamPeeta shirts yet? Let's get real, I want one for #TheHungerGames ASAP!
funny now but yesterday I found a squerril in a return duct yesterday. I think I jumped back 20 ft
her secret isn't the extensive government training, but simply being a mother
#NYC is very sunny today, but nothing beats the "sunshine" in the Beckett Theatre!
That sox games blew me.
I'm not watching the show, but I've heard time and time again that Rock of Ages is an awesome musical.
#HappyBirthdayJustin! you've grown up so much! #HappyBirthdayKidrauhl I ❤ you!
NCL has all sailings from NY with Reduces Deposit Free Onboard Credit Sale Ends Monday details Jackie 877-416-9722 ext 4413
Even though I really loved you, I'm gonna smile because I deserve to. It'll all get better in time <3
Okay I'll bite. What's SXSW?
Ok why the fuck (and I apologize for my French) was twilight showcased on the great movies montage.
It matters not whether you win or lose; what matters is whether I win or lose.
Thanks, , I guess. If I billed hourly, I'd charge $600/hr. So the book costs the same as 84 sec. of my advice. A bargain, I'd say
I LOVE sequels!
Amazin pitching!!!! GO METS!!
The website for #ala11 is HORRIBLE.
RT : Q1: Set of processes and technology for the management, distribution and delivery of rich media assets.
stagnant, look horrible tonight
I want to live to be 100! Seriously, I want to stop taking my high blood pressure and cholesterol meds!
Just so you know, kids.... auto-tune is not an instrument...
Fingers crossed.
#schoolmemories The asshole computer lab teacher at my high school and the time he kicked me off the Lego team. Dick.
Now militant teachers threaten to boycott Ofsted inspections in push to ... - Daily Mail
I'm so sorry for my late reply. But, thanks so much for all the s/o ......I so appreciate ur thoughtfulness :D
I'm just trying to pitch a Grace action film, produced by HLG Films and My Damn Channel...
In your game preview, Pettitte admitted his use of HGH not steroids. C'mon the Clemens trial was all over that for days.
I won't tell you not to, but as a non-superfan who admired him, I think he seemed a better man (and maybe filmmaker) than rapper.
opens mouth. closes mouth. opens mouth. closes mouth. likes to be fed. short memory. Yep, sounds like a researcher :D
I'm looking for a roommate and an apartment.
it's cool .. just somethin to look at when Twitter is dry
I'm just going to have to eat a big bowl of pasta and watch some TV until I'm tired again...
I found my copy of FOR THE PEOPLE [REMIX] I love it!!! Brings me memories of Mambos Hacienda
Schweet! Welcome! Been tryna connect since way back when I was in ATL. Finally get to partake! Will holla soon...
At work driving around bout to be lunch time in a minute easy work
Children don't grow up our body's get bigger... But our hearts get torn up...
I'm sorry. According to the show's intro he's an "investigative" reporter. This being what that looks like.
AH good one... no. i wanna real bad! go wit me sistafriend??
RYAN MY BABY HITS A HR> #Braun that's #3 this year. 9th RBI. I LOVE YOU MAN
love this!
&#9822; Prove your Innocence
I need an uber battery to keep using #UberSocial. Battery drains from 100% to 0% within 5 minutes, long enough to send 2 tweets.
Thanks for following, Selso! (...did I pick the correct first name? =D)
Reading the script to pick scenes for the auditions. Modesty-schmodesty. Damn, this is good!
I left before the subscribe feature, which changes things. Didn't need a "private" social network before, but this is public FB. Hm.
I'm just me. Or not me. We just don't know! LOL
how the hell do you have 143 followers? Who really wants to read the nonsense you have to say?
cleaning up my C:/ ..... WOW things are quickly convoluted.
Poetry Slam, wazzup.
hahaha yeah I do too.... And I have classes with him, so all I do is laugh at him.
In angst, I thought about giving up cereal for 1 second, but I love it too much. Gotta count on the Gonzaga Bulldogs now!
Thank you for great customer service on the phone today
tammy baldwin came
I am so happy for my girl for getting the manager position!
A politician that lessens social security will not get my vote at any time, now or in the future. Just the way it is.
Thanks for the RT of Bob's review!
Jim Brown not impressed with "anyone" in the draft. CLE taking T Richardson at 4 overall? Not impressed, he's "ordinary". Get off my lawn!
is this Mr. Deji Dawodu? One of Baltimore's finest photographers?
I think I am so far removed from remember what it tastes like, that as long as there's some resemblance, visual and...
"Make and sell beautiful things and try not to be stupid about it." - Paul Budnitz, founder of Kidrobot
"A-B-C you later!" - Frank Messer
A sentence is a list of words. Whether it's unordered, ordered, or definition varies. But you wouldn't mark it up that way
It was hours ago and I'm still laughing hard about breaking the door at Menchies
If I tell you, are you going to reply with how many calories are in it?
Trust yourself to be yourself. You may not have all the answers right now, but that's okay. Patience is your lesson today.
How many people watch Thomasxdgk on youtube? Reply!!! Please:)
is ready to be done with work for the week and start watching some basketball...
My knee just went out of the socket in the middle of ballet #ow #Ew 😢
“: here's to the kids who are too awkward to function.” hahaha
We're doing #21CRadio now if you wanna join in!
Of all the liars in the world, sometimes the worst are your own fears. ~Rudyard Kipling
No comment.
Are you guys down?
happy Easter tweeps - and go !!
Nothin' better than roasted veggies and scrambled eggs sauteed in teriyaki sauce. Yum! Oh, and procrastinating on hw...
Happy Mothers day !!! From cable car pub 🍻🍸🍔🍟
what do you think, is it real or not?
players dont slide anymore? The same Mat Gamel had an amazing walk off slide just last week for the Brewers...
Still reading Okay for Now by Gary D. Schmidt. Pretty great so far. Love the main character's voice.
yessir. Best feeling irons I swung. I'm playing tomorrow morning so after I break 4 clubs I'll be back on the market Sunday...
Finna pop this white Cheddar popcorn and lay it down
Everything is perfectly perfect and happens at the right moment.
you should make a music video for 11:11
Ugly Kid Joe--I Hate Everything About You.
This calls for some beer, butterbear!
First time 10+ goals have been scored in a playoff game since 1990
what's alot of miss?
If packets are a public address structure, what exactly is their "postal" system?
Unfollow me, it's not that hard people. Damn
I wish I could. Unfortunately I'm prettying up an existing deck.
Another Follow Friday cool indie music community. Check it out!
Happy New Year!
The idea of dying, coming back, and not remembering her family - FOREVER - freaked out the wee Ms Bales.
Allentown native Susan Snyder wins Pulitzer Prize for Philadelphia Inquirer reporting
MT : Hampden to med school campus in east baltimore and back in less than 45 mins today on #bike. I'll take it. faster than the jhmi
SID IS BACK
Night twitter!(:
Women make 80% of healthcare decisions
ladies and gentlemen, this is your captain freaking...
First day of school and I'm already late lmao xD
Pickup Line: Wanna ride? i got a truck and a box of condoms.
I'm so tired of Nate messing up our room...*sigh*
keep up the good work man..
Omz! What's happenin', pappy! Thanks for the follow!
If I don't make it to the pearly gates please let my son through the door, nothing more....lord!
oh yea told me about that, damn, we woulda won in OT finally I bet even though we haven't won in OT yet haha
That was beautiful. beautiful. i love you guys okay.
Is it just me or is twitter so slow? lol -Vivi.
I TOLD YA'LL DALLAS MAVERICKS WAS GONA WIN THE CHIP... NOW EVERYBODY WHO BET ME ITS TIME TO PAY UP MORE MONEY FOR THE PIGGY BANK
Or the bat? That's what they're apparently saying. He's staying in.
smh at some girls. "but I love him" foo that's not love, that's desperate, like you said -_-
Third match has begun! Tune in and keep tweeting about GSL We're already trending in the US! BlizzardCup
Jamie Grace is gonna be coming to sing at RP for GK.....what?!
Have you asked it it's favorite color yet? My 7-yo won't leave poor Siri alone.
Karen and Drita don't have to be friends. They should squash it so they could at least be in the same room
Throw your heart over the fence and the rest will follow! ~ Norman Vincent Peale
I love Trader Joe's...its like Wholefoods for poor people
Say thanks always in all ways.
happy birthday again! such a great evening! xo
how come chipotle can't deliver?? they could have a lil burrito wagon... oh well #wishfulthinking hahaha ......
they say money can't nut happiness, but I'd rather cry in a Ferrari than on a bicycle ;D
In houston!!!!!
i can take the joy out of ANYthing.
alright thanks!
they bleed just like us. In my biggie voice.
Hey Coach! Hoping to be a part of your coaches clinic again this year. Need some more info :)
You sure deserve it. Esp. if said all american breakfast includes sausage.
#thingsih8doing getting up in the morning !
make sure you let casting know !
Your Voice is a Amazing! Can't wait to see your new movie! :D -Choirbunny (Elizabeth Siooh)
Agree 100%. Was tough to watch. RT : It is sad to do this to Muhammad Ali. Is he this hard up for money?
I think those economic agencies play a large role in GOLDFINGER. Or maybe I heard wrong.
What happened? lol
Follow me Please, I love You <3
We are over halfway through the programming year and the best is yet to come.
Shooting #bridal editorial today with and ! So excited!
i haven't scrunched my hair in forever o.O
Great point. And, the conference is personally enriching too. But, I wonder if we're misplacing our energy.
Oh My Goodness. I watched That Snake video. & i think.....i saw my life flash before my eyes. Scaryy stuff.
Had a great day on the SD harbor sailing with ! So nice out today : )
I'm always impressed how the reporters ride the horses and have no problems doing the interviews w/ someone else on a horse
I also believe that SS tax cut should not happen. There is already enough concern with SS. All of the baby boomers retiring.
i wish i could just sleep a whole day. i think that would feel amazing.
Just had a lady with no teeth scream at me and tell me I had roach eggs in my brain....
Follow Me ?? Please
RT: Never give up on life, even when you feel as if life has given up on you.<--- SO TRUE
Your dad is hilarious! Great photos, Taylor! :)
hey Christian it's don, how are ye?
Poll: Do you think the mortgage settlement will help homeowners?
What's them seven thangs that make yo phone rang .
agreed... took away the spontaneity... don't have hours to spend hunting for the next-best song i'm looking for
Registration is now open for the next BarCamp on April 14th.
#Nashville friends: Needing recommendations for photographers for Baby's 1st Year. Thanks!
OMG :O
>< im bored
I've only had it once. Trying to find healthy options other than peanut butter
I'm off to dine with the most WONDERFUL group of people I could ever hope to know! Thank you for being all that you are!
Yeah, I'm ready for next season's final answers. Wouldn't mind seeing more of the characters IF they can make it interesting.
oh relax. he doesn't want orange demolition man
Geoffrey Gamble, Esq. appointed Chair of the ICC Commission on Trade and Investment: See ICC website.
Beach, books, and boys - not in that order. The water is great Tyler - come join me here on Fire Island.
be careful of the roadwork. it might attack the van.
RT : Time to return library books - just looked up one to see if I could borrow it, and found out I have it at home.
life is good my friend!!
no such thing with new intro
Next at #GenieFair2012, Guha Shankar of American Folklife Center on Methods, Means, & Best Practices for Oral History Projects.
RT : Just destroyed a burger. dear god. It is so much better than Burgatory it hurts
They're playing NYE at my apartment... RT : Just announced! Matchbox 12/25. No adv tix. No will call.
"Justin Beiber love child investigation" -_- smh how is that news?
Hello again to all my friends, together we can play some Rock n' Roll!
looking forward to The Bachelor Pad. they r really pushing the Jake and Vienna conflict. it should be good!
It's really amazing how if you pitch shift Bryan Adams down he almost sounds legitimately soulful.
That nigga left something here
You're my best friend and I love you.. I wish you had a twitter, Nick.
if you like chinese, try the bamboo house on the main strip, so good!!
you're welcome!
These mfs than came back come on Kentucky
My man M.C.A.'s got a beard like a billy goat.
Alright now
I love Buckley. Spent 9 years as Military and now my husband is civilian worker on base. Glad to answer any questions.
Finally gettin back in shape, playing shape that is. Throwin off the mound soon.
Funny how easily and quickly we get over our little spats - not long enough to be called fights. Can't wait until he gets off work :)
I like how my room stays at comfortable 17 million degrees :D
the G should go.
Right. Party-line voters are going to fight to the death their point, so I gave up hardcore debating long ago.
We have stink bugs. Those are pretty gross. Most everything else is poisonous, but I don't think that will faze him :)
Best of wishes :)
Completed Soulless. A bit ridiculous, but a fun read overall! Definitely want to read the rest of the series at some point.
What a beautiful day it is! Perfect for the opening of 8pm N'est pas?
Killer: Donald Driver on to the finals on DWTS!
People are starting to call the #INSen race for Mourdock before has shown up to his party
We just signed a new client for web, social media and the first ever Shar-pei dog App...they have developed a cure for Shar-pei fever.
cant believe MY Snooks is 6 years old today!!! :) Happy Birthday Jamie! <3
You have until next Friday to get your name in the raffle for the Mother's Day Spa Package.
yes they sure do.
Upgraded to DVR just to make sure I catch #BeavisAndButtHead ... :)
I don't see it coming with an iPad or a iPhone. Makes no sense. With an Apple TV or Apple branded TV, yes.
Just got to Intelligentsia - free WiFi, yea! Still setting up, and I am in the middle of the shop with notebook and Webcam!
Raspberries video is in good shape. Will be back to MED by third week of December.
- you did Mumford proud invite, lady! Thanks for you Detroit passion! U ARE a real rock-star!
Feelings are feelings regardless on how they were developed.
yes it should
So proud of all our Miss Teen CA clients...they did such a great job! And we're especially proud of Lauren for placing in the Top Ten
I believe in Megan Fox.
Girls will lie, lie and lie.
Yes #ChelseaFC. Still we can get in top 4
How about the video of a reporter asking Dem congresswomen to comment on Maher's "Palin = c***" comment in Rush's wake?
Want at your school? Book him at www.facebook.com/zakdowntown
I miss my baby.
Curious what , , or members will be coming to EOalchemy?
we need as many deals as possible. DM me for contact
Thanks a bloody bunch to 're donating bloody mary luv to our #bloodybrunch swag bags! You don't wanna miss this!
My tummy is hurting ;o I'm prolly hungry
Any websites or blogs who are looking for a #fantasyleague partner please get back to us we are looking for new partners
Thanks for the RT!
How come everyone knows their CAHSEE results?
Rapping Granny!!!
Smile hehe gosh im bored,
its because your in there
Today is 4 gram 1/8th Monday!! Also, The Clinic On Holly has moved and has officially been renamed 'The Clinic Colorado'
Look for the man with the silver Pan!!!!!!!!!1
Hot New Contest THE EROTIC .com. Chance at 50k and a modeling contract. If you think you're HOT sign up!!!
oh, no! If toenails are could cry, i would be crying:(
Remember, stay in your own lane! If someone's blocking your success, temporarily switch lanes to past & then continue on.
Highlight: post-panel chat with Paul Duguid about the future of history / heritage and the continued need for trained "cultural custodians".
and are putting it down. The Pulse!
plastic is so five minutes ago ;)
Happy National Siblings Day!
klout is a place to find people who are actively engaged in a topic and to compare yourself...
1reason facebook sucxs is becuz of all the reasons ur acount can get disabled. Its very annoying getting ur account disabled Needs 2 b fixed
Thank you!!!
Yeah I think it's going to happen for you.
hey, since im SO immature :) its time to actually start acting like it:D
#ThingsNotToSayOnTheFirstDate omg I love your clothes :p you look like a clown :p
The defense on the team that is playing against right now is full of dbags. Looking at you number 27
NYC Musetechies, how many of us are still here, and what prank can we play on everybody who's gone to #mw2012 ?
I don't share, sorry :p lol
I never been one to pump my chest up like I'm the illest. A lot of ma fuckas out here are doing just that and im tired of that shit.
Look me up!
Thanks for the retweet, Maria!
#SuperBowl The momentum goes cold with all these replays. Let 'um PLAY! Go Giants!
OT in DC
Feeling much better
I've got into this big Jack's Mannequin phase. It's all I've been listening to really for the past two weeks.
Andrew Shaw just told the NHL that he will be player of Month and Rookie of the Year, NHL agreed
Less than three hours left to vote on the 2012-13 #Lynbrook School District budget.
Girls with gagues >>
I think you would be really into In Watermelon Sugar if you haven't read it yet.
Is sick. Not feeling to well :(
Congrats on the Trade and welcome to Denver!
me & were just having some #ramen & coffee lol ~~~~rich
OK, you both have my information.
Hausa people are wicked!!!!!.
#Blazers take a 10 pt lead into the 4th over the #Warriors. with 26 matching entire GSW bench pts
I don't care about smoking pot per se. Point was that drug war is most insidious racist force in country right now.
Why do I stay up so late ? 😥
aren't you cool.
Do u know who's the aide tweeting for Barry? I cant believe he's the one actually in charge of his Iphone or BBerry...
We want to start recording video interviews of San Diego experts on , who would you like to meet? Send suggestions!
sorry meant 's grandfather and 's dad were both butchers. Keepin it real
Our site has been down as we've been changing things around. Get ready for a whole new Celebotastic look!
Here it comes...the corny Valentine's Day Message...Happy Heart Day to all my followers. I love you guys!!OK..all done!
... DUDE. YOU'RE SUCH A FUCKING TEASE.
you are one of the most luckiest guys in the world.
If your actions inspire others to dream more, learn more, do more and become more, you are a leader. John Quincy Adams
let's go younngggiinnnnn
yeah, trynna hit up NY a bunch tho for music stuff. you going to Cali, with your bro?
Why does your computer have 12 updates when you are ready to go home? #unplug?
will do
Madeline Forester will be live on 1180am Friday morning @ 742am discussing her cd release party that evening @ Boulder Brooks Landing.
Over a 7 footer. WOW. I hate Duke, but WOW
oh--I don't think mass works for Google or FB.
What a night of protecting #Pittsburgh need some sleep for training this weekend. Questions? Just tweet at me!
": #Libra wants it all or nothing at all!"
continuation rules different in LA too haha
Oh thank you very much. :) I will try my best.
Shoot, didn't realize you hadn't read that. My Finnick Odair joke from the other day probably went right past you lol.
You n2 hip hop? U gonna wanna tune n 2 TSMRadio @ http//tsm-1.com/ click the radio button - then click play on the left. LEGGO!
thanks for the follow, we're looking forward to a great week!
goodmorning hope u have a great day :D
On the phone with my daddy... hes saying he "saw" Mikey. omgg i wish i was in L.A with them..
have fun! Love Edwardsville!
Ah hell I'm back!!!!
sweet Jesus. You picked quite a spot there. If I show up, are you gonna sing a show tune?
Who really cares if smokes some kush? Steve jobs revolutionized technology on LSD!
Had a blast, too. Look forward to the next one whenever our schedules align again.
that's impossible. i'm gaining so much. im huge.
It is likely for there to be a dance with life, a artsy reply to its intrinsic limitations and concerns.
Glad to be apart of it!
We're on our way p.s. i'm hungry
Very nice! /cc
That was right up your alley, PM.
This is like the most interracial couplest event I've ever been to. Every black person not working security is swirlin it.
:( this is not a good time...
i never listen/fuck wit sumone that wont help me get nowhere
Flu season is here, and I'm celebrating by having the right side of my neck 3x bigger than the normal.
Attack of the gingers in this car lol
yes sir I going too
Jackass just came on. All i could ask for now is a girl to cuddle with.
live in the mix tonight at san martin!!! gonna be a fun debut!!!
Nice! RT “: february 2012...Los Angeles with school to help the poor!”
You lost bitch get over it!!!
Last night I had a dream that I was very good at math and solved all kinds of complicated problems using the power of math
Don't be a jealous hoe, mind yours.
Sealers should be looked at as enhancements, not cures. They don't fix anything.
Good Morning from sunny Boston!!
Always gon be the best 2 me! RT : Kobe Bryant: "It's always funny to hear the "Kobe Sucks" chant because why provoke me...It's fun."
today was fun minus the part where i hit my head on a wall.
He don't want none of Barber Yano neither.
A friend doesn't go on a diet because you are fat
Loving what cityglamevents.com have to offer everyone.
fantastic group at the "Blown Away" session! So much fun!
What a ride we rode! Your triumphs and tragedies... The legacy sealed.
We Need to Talk About Kevin - well made, completely disturbing. Great counterpoint to celebration of violence in Hunger Games
How about we get these likes to 300 only 75 more to go!!! Also make sure to spread the word about us and follow us on twitter!!!!
Happy Mother's Day sis!!!!!! Ah I can't believe it!!!!!! So happy for you! I love you so much!
best to assume that anything you put in digital form can end up just about anywhere. Best advice, have nothing to hide.
Thanks for the tweet!
Two new favorite colors -- !!
Got new headphones and my looking forward to my otter box tomorrow as well.
I just walked past there last night. I recommend Salem Beer Works if you're looking for a place for lunch/dinner.
ahahha oh shit busted we're at Elixer come hang!
#Tampa Bay picks Gerald McCoy
OP played on YCMIU today! Thanks guys!
Spinning deep, soul, sexy house at the EPIC hotel from now til 11pm...come by, Miami is beautiful tonight!
try and get tickets for the phils Tuesday. Games at 105 but fuck it
ever thought of filming in puerto rico?
how old is he.?
It's 9 o' clock in the mornin', conversation got boring.
Let's "Wing it" #Wednesday! Pro Players Boneless Wings 1/2 pound $3.99 www.wausautogo.com for #delivery!
Oh yeah, I've seen your stuff on Instagram. Ouchie!
the way kobe acting we aint going to win this game
C'mon warriors. If you can't win games, at least be good at losing them so we can get a first round pick.
Thank you!! RT : I just seen ya video's on youtube ur verses is sick keep up the work hun
it was better than I even remembered it. Terry Gilliam is indeed the man.
OMG OMG CAMERON JUST SAID I'M TORN. TIME TO SERENADE HIM X-FACTOR STYLE
Wale is so adorable! He graced our city with his presents!
Today was iite kinda annoyin at sum points but im ready for the circus
There's a reason I don't remember ever watching all of Bambi - it sucks
call me again baby
I know what a Belmont transfer is and THAT IS DIRTY.
Should have multiple new colleges available for shipping in the next few days!
I'm a little nigga, thats why its so raw to just watch me battle lions, cause I'm a little skinny nigga battlin' niggas three times my size
Good Call! RT : I KNEW IT WAS GOING TO BE MAN IN THE MIRROR THAT SHE SINGS
Go OKC ! We on Are Way
#autismspeaks raise awareness for autism
The strangr the bettr RT We love your strange thoughts! ;)
Good Monday morning to us! We've reached 75 FB fans! What is inspiring you this new week?
Tony Soprano had a similar moment with his son. I guess I offer that 2 make u feel better, but now that I type it, not so sure.
Never cared much for oats till having your jumbo ones. I've wasted years! They're amazing. Have it almost every day.
Google's first suggested autocomplete for "he can" is "he can't even bait a hook."
Just got home looks like its going to be another tuna night!!!!
dam why do women call me spanky just because i like to go wahoo and spank my ass i don't get it... oh look cute turtles. :)
like Argentina v England 1998 or Portugal v England 2006?
#Love will never Force itself on anyone, but it will hold on and fight all the way to the end.... :)
TWOSDAY! Two for one piercings by Chris (jewelry included!) al day long! Come see us!! questions? call 206-329-8274!
lol I'm with my cousin watching the game
continued: also describes some interesting issues relating to data ownership in his blog post on web-scale library systems
A bold lip, and white or colored jeans! // RT : #trending: striped tees. What are you pairing it with?
Want to win a room & VIP table for Thursday? Follow & RT to be entered!
I really want it to snow .....
savory chard pie...
thanks so much for the lovely reception tonight. It was a great venue and a wonderful time!
Today is going good so far
Good morning, ! We are back from our holiday break and open for business!
i followed (:
Eintracht Frankfurt win promotion back to #Bundesliga! GO EAGLES!!!
ooh I love her!!
Btwn GA and Scandal, she's got me!
Thank you one direction for singing amazing songs that a lot of girls can relate to <3
If you've heard about the game
Honey, here's that new laptop you've been wanting. What? Oh, you didn't? I guess I'll keep it then, only $15/month.
Yo, those motion profile pics are gay.
Big Hug from our giraffe! xoxo
I am super jealous! You two stop talking bad about me.
Had A Super Good Weekend .. Real #BASED and Positive.. Let's Keep That Wave Goin Into This Week
I'm calling the Qualcomm/Snapdragon story
this scared me for a sec! but i know youre coming back :D
How true! RT! we may have to create our own medicating area ....
#Oscars Will there be any surprises tonight?
Good thing poverty has now settled in. This way I can detox from my weekend.
I desperately need a nap.
It's Friday!! Who is going out for a ride this weekend?
does not understand how her neighbors party until four in the morning and then wake her up at eight!
RT I'm thankful for Twitter as I follow draft from far away. Miss the flavor/lunacy more than I thought I might.
Hahaha why would you do that??
Sleep. Is my very best friend.
It was a great day in Buffalo! Hope it was a great day everywhere else! Happiness is days like this!
I Hate How If You Have A BestFriend Thats A Guy EveryOne Thinks Your Dating
You know it Baby ♥
Way to go Texas Rangers! That's my team. See ya again in the World Series!
hey, great ideas, follow me & I'll follow you
Happy New Years everyone
Every year. : All I can tell you is that the PP finale and the GA finale are both going to have shocking endings...
Hey I'm thinking of doing a monologue contest type of thing would you be interested in entering it if I did?
bless me father for I have sinned ;)
aww which grade? :)
we are both rescuez. :)
I like that I have glitter stuck to my shoes instead of mud.
no one said it had to be pretty, but it's nice to breath again. 7-0-0 #sportingkc let's do it again on Saturday!
Hot Interconnects Event Warms Up for Summer Symposium - HPCwire
so watsup this morning
Thank you for your
Last night was fun as shit. Thanks to and Triple Crossed!
Let's go vols!!
Final preparations for the event today. We can't wait to show you guys what we've created. It should be awesome.
Congratulations for winning our March PitchOff
it is such a well-conceived show with 8+ compelling characters
67 degrees outside
Haha! Except I wouldn't get there until tomorrow. I'll just follow the hashtag... is there one?
i would play but except im just not good at guessing games lol
Conflictual feelings on this GOBAMA FOR THE GAYS thing...
I LOVE the Fiat Cinquecento, but you should never buy a new car the first model year; and next year, everyone will have one.
Spurs didn't play good on D, Parker had an off night shooting ... just saying
Thanks so much! Put a long day of work in today, so much to do in so little time!
thanks lady!
I happen to be doing the exact same thing on #workwednesdays... Hash tag thief! LOL
If you have a business and want to be a pool party sponsor, contact us!
Know how it takes time to build a reputation? Yeah, well, one use of the wrong finger can destroy it quickly. Just sayin’.
it's okay. I think we ALL are. It's like Heaven in a cup.
When you have an opportunity to watch Kindergarten Cop you take it.
I swear today was the best, :)
Liberals have many tails and chase them all. ~ H. L. Mencken
Dear , is there anything you can do to make your website faster? Or at least put the "jobs" button back on the front page?
At USI for graduation!
If u love hip hop this is where u shoud be tonight.A Tribute 2 J Dilla 2night at Hidden House w/ !no cover all night!
You guys are awesome.
love you both.
#FollowBack contact us for your Video Production | Graphic Design | Photography needs!
Pussy so good make em wanna sing to it
Celebrating #jazzday with Howard Williams big band at the garage tonight! 7-10.
Just ran into NathanFletcher on Front St.He is putting in the hard work to become the next great Mayor of San Diego.Vote for True Leadership
can i get a refill ..
nobody is selling any good used kayaks right now, ugh.
Oh, Sue.
I hope all of you had a very wonderful earth day by bonding with the earth in some way. If not, then get to it soon. There is nothing finer!
SloPig was a great hit with lots of great chefs and bartenders. Thanks everyone who came out and tried our punch!
How can I get my book in your hands to read?!?!
Had a dream last night that I forgot to check my facebook for a few days & everyone from my class in HS had died & I missed it and or did it
Just finished #reading The Shrinking of Treehorn, and how I have another name for another of my non-existent children! This will not do.
how do you feel about getting all this attention since Cody became famous??? :)
Gimme a time bb!
<----Kool Kid, Smart Woman:)
I couldn't agree more with your last tweet. It is so frustrating from that aspect being a part of a "local" band.
There is literally no suspense in the draft, I love it.
Happy Mothers day Ma
Pleasure to criticize prevents enjoy wonderful.
they said Thank You!
When should I plant my garden? Any other pointers?
Game on
30 minutes to Kentucky game. Hope I can stay awake to watch them win!
you are
iwas tryin to be nice to give u another follower but since u dont want to follow back . Fuck it
hey!!! That's great!! I was wondering. Yeah, musicians are lame.
Wow i made food on the stove that was edible
Also want opportunities to work w/other museum depts & build one's own professional development. For many, FOH is first step.
We will see you there!
Sometimes snowboarder style can venture into the meat packer realm.
is Ava spongebob or dora? Give me a hint!
psshhaaww. no. ricky is too. its either ricky or cats..mostly ricky though
City Cafe sets the pace for Midtown's Public Safety fund as a Diamond Sponsor! Thank you City Cafe!!
Just saw Ghost Protocol---TC never ceases to amaze me...His movie-making genius exudes from all his films....including this one!
#truth your the dumb one. #fact I'm the smart one
- Good question! I've been trying to track down what'll be taking place & where. , any #4sqDay #Boston plans?
Spend Easter in #SanDiego & create #family memories w/ Easter Bunny appearances, an underwater Easter egg hunt & more! Info to come.
feed me
i love you goodnight :)
RT AT&T's Randall Stephenson at #gradnation recognizing young people achieving success at Ballou HS in DC.
Who we are never changes. Who we think we are does. Mary Almanac
I'd still like to think that the song "No Scrubs" is about the TV show.
Bring your dancing shoes to Fontana's 105 Eldridge NYC. BrownRiceFamily will be performing honoring the legend Bob Nester Marley on Blac ...
off to the vet!
The song Livin On a Prayer will forever now remind me of
ughg! that link didn't work, send it again chi
US source back from Haiti on delivering shelter to injured and homeless. Source is from Shelterbox USA. Interested 4 AC360?
#hth2012 Frank: noting that we need to stop digging our hole deeper. Need more professionalism in data (YEP!)
what do you think about the spontaneous streak this week?
Thanks for following me. But in the absence of a blue tick icon, how can you be sure it's me? Esp. as you're not sure I exist
Somebody should give me a S/O!
I see. We'll talk one day about the why+how! ;)
i'm glad that is happy now. she really deserves it.
STUDENT DISCOUNT DAY IS EVERY WEDNESDAY!!!! Save 5% with student I.D.
P is for Punjab; A is for Afghan Pathans of the North-West Frontier; K is for Kashmir; S is for Sind; Tan is for Baluchistan.
it's not an overreaction if there's a note. Or three.
“: Love when he puts on his button-up in the morning, hate having to take it off him at night. #TSM”
The Lucky One is by far.. the best book ever.
Updated me bio. (Yes, I know I said "me") Lol.
Thank you!
Ha, this a bad time to be claiming the Vikings.
Collaboration can happen at lunch. Just make sure that teachers bump into each other when not teaching.
Terrific - thanks for the feedback!
Uncertainty Looms over Facebook's Stock Market Entrance - U.S. News &amp; World Report
I don't think you did you challenge today on instagram??
I will make the beef you will need to make the pork
Guess I was late to bed; ghost has already started wandering thru the house. Heard it walk into kitchen, checked, nobody in there. Pets all
Used 2B gay "marriage" or "same-sex" #marriage scare-quoted, now it's "traditional" in MSM, meaning it's all
Fuck working out without headphones. I should've just gone home
It's time for a solo walk along the beach #YOLO <3
doing the exact same in Econ haha
This is the real deal. I am helping people just like you create a weekly and monthly check while they lose weight using our amazing all...
Hi Teala! Could i get a follow back from you today? :)
Government workers have to be the laziest people I know. Can you pick up the phone?Oh wait y'all are government. You don't answer questions
You're an ex for a reason. That's the point, I hope I never meet anyone like you. Fuck, what shitty world this would be with two of you.
When you see guys in Victoria Secret looking at thongs >
Fun Fact Friday: Family travelers take an average of 4.5 trips each year. Where is your next one?
haha, paul from the b center ran the #PhillyMarathon today. and congrats on yours, btw!
I love Pandora is great at work
What a wonderful audience we had for tonight wouldn't you say ?
I just automatically gravitate toward him lol. It's like radar
#SinceWeBeingHonest I only talk to u cause my friends all mostly live outta town n the ones in town be at work & skool when I'm off.
Hey guys! Tweets here are coming to you from John Talerico and our social media manager,
So ready or the weekend #tired AF
yay!!! Thank you!
Reading old texts from someone and smiling like an idiot.♥
Traffic report seems out of control as does metro..be safe getting to Vinoteca Winos!
all my friends are leaving ):
Then who goes to Vegas...I thought they had 1st choice. ..wouldn't they take TCU
Lost season 6 is damn good. :)
I'm West Coast! Seattle.
It's not even a toss-up! Big Papi hands-down!
Hey guy riding by on the Harley: TURN YOUR FREAKING RADIO DOWN. It's not even 7am.
so cool
Hm. I take it that it's not available to be linked to?
the cap is on, that is what!
Please follow me<3
call it the Valley of Death—the terrain between proof of concept and the beginning of mass production and significant sales.
Twitter account hacked again! If you received a recent message from me sorry!
#Film | If a #ScriptSupervisor queries a scene's action in your script, you've just been covered. - oxox
Love Me Or Hate Me.. Either Way I Am Who I Am .
let me get that free gift card
Awful managing in the ninth, Ron. Calling for a sacrifice with the worst bunter on the team is not a good call. Horrible.
Happy Pastor's Appreciation month to all the Pastors!!!!My Pastor Father Pfleger!
Whew! And, we're done. That did take a while.
i just started bawling with Alyssa came down haha
I must've eaten 30 oz. of red meat at Texas De Brazil last night. So good, though.
After "Obama Beats Weiner," can the please run a "Boehner Pulls Out" headline tomorrow? Or is that too bipartisan for NewsCorp?
I have a doc on how to ask to have them remove it looking for it now will post when I find it.
omg i LOVED tonights ep. I see why you loved it. I was in tears for Daphne. Great job! cant wait for more
Anyone else bothered by the fact that Opening Day falls on Good Friday this year?
look at my tweet pass it on
ur missing a good show
Filming today!
Ate shirmp ceviche for the first time. Its good.
RETWEET THIS TWEET TO HAVE A CHANCE AT WINNING A PRIZE PACK OF HEALTH PRODUCTS! WE'll ANNOUNCE WINNER TOMORROW MORNING!!
That follows only if you assume that gayness leads inevitably to gay marriage. Still, where do I sign up for the porn and socialism?
That was the BEST night ever in my life!
Well put. RT : If you're going to be original, be prepared to be copied.
new years... lets get weird...
Reasons I am happy : 1) Big Ravens W last night. 2) Fall menu starts today! Meaning meatloaf, pot pie, chopped steak salad are all back!
Can't even put it into words how touched I by everyone who was a part of my Father in Law's cancer benefit! Over 5K raised!
aww my little cuzzo just came in the room and said "whose that pretty girl" i told him dani he said "dwanie" aww so cute??
Thank you! :) RT You look gorgeous!! Love the outfit RT : New Post: Debut of the flower pants!
Non-dairy frozen yogurt, anyone??? Had to stop by yogen fruz for non-dairy sorbet option....not bad, but
Thanks for your reply. I report each UCE as I receive it.
Whooaaaaa Netflix changed
Oh I just found out today about it. I wish I would have known earlier to get a ticket. Looks cool!
Want to help people who are struggling with their finances? Volunteer today! We need help in all sorts of areas beyond mentoring.
Don't break my heart by favoring Chelsea. I think Arsenal and Liverpool can be friends today. Neutrality is worse.
Don't know if I can trust you.
Maccabi Tel Aviv loses tough game to Panathinaikos in the
Nice Patriots podcast with Simmons...love how you're so sure a team that hasn't beat a team over .500 all year will dominate
thank you :)
Learn how to become Wealthy by Making Money and Savings Money on Energy Bills across the US. Call Now For Details 1-646-397-9817
Was going to include "love you more" in that tweet but that would border on groupie status, no?
So how many of you would have preferred to be in traffic with me over watching the Heat game?
Boys, if you don't look like Calvin Klein models, don't expect us to look like Victoria secret angels.
Judge ruled Washington County Sheriff should not be held in contempt for refusing a court order.
RT : Hardware literacy changes the way we interact with technology #ohdc // Amen!
Going to be downtown/CU campus this afternoon. Hit us up if you want to renew/join. We have 2012 scarves/buttons with us. Prost!
Not that the lineup tweets are bad, they are solid info! Just enjoy the other insights from your position with the organization
AND R U STILL COMIN
I don't put much faith in any ND players
it's fun to be clever :-D Hump day is actually fartlek day (still trying to come up with something clever for that one).
I believe mini m&m's have a better chocolate to hard shell ratio.
Dream big.
A stationary set!
Program cycle special for level 2 - $80 Program cycle special for Advance - $99 by registration only!
RT : When we added Marco Rubio to the ticket on our Florida poll Mitt Romney dropped from 45% to 43%
That Time Flung Some Little 6th Grader 10 Feet Because We Were Running To The Lunch Line :')
your welcome =D
Wussup can i get a follow back
Never stand up when your foot falls asleep wearing heels...
Here's something else nerdy. Saw Chris Kimball today..in person..he glared.
OHMYGOD, invert the fucking phase and shit SOUNDS GOOD AGAIN
That is glorious. You are one step closer to living the life of a chick-flick heroine.
that boi mosley aint swing the whole fight bro and he got knocked down
Garry Sheffield arrested in Tampa Bay after getting caught with 3 pounds of marijuana
RT : we are at $20653! Thank you for putting us over the edge! #Pittsburgh is amazing!
YES. Education is the one thing we've got that makes a REAL difference in people's lives. Thank you for being a teacher.
#Teamyandy Chrissy ah old ass bitch w/ zero class
#digiconf12 O'Leary closing: The best way to predict the future is to create it. Willy Brandt
thanks... thats y im happy ur my friend #salute #realbitches:-)
damn... Sorry bro.
it was a good effort by the patrons favorite , kind of.. 72 is boring.. But great to see a guy who appreciates it win.
I'm just gonna say it one more time, we should burn down the fence
Do I think Peyton Manning is our best move? No. Am I extremely excited to see him in a Dolphins uni? Abso-fucking-lutely.
I've said it twice.
rack of lamb for dinner tonight—simply the best lamb there is.
Everyone is back in one room except who is in Florida all week at a conference.
me too! I love quantum leap ziggy!
lol damn.... Clintondale on the come up!
Waiting for 9 so me and Alex can go to Wally-World, then school. Today is my last day):
We show up when something bad happens.We need to show up all the time to balance the stories of communities says Akilah of the Boston Globe.
The entire computer crashing?
OMG rushed home to see LIVE!! Ah. I guess I am a #Weller :) <3
lol MT : You're killing me, Smalls! I approve of guac w/habaneros, but dill?? Really?
": #Gemini's have a bad twin to blame their mischievous side on." !!*this is so true!!
aaawww man how did he take it poor him
Would love to see you tonight coach. Let me know if you can get out.
Wuts gd ! I C U SLIME
I miss falling asleep with him.. Faccccck. I always put myself in te toughest predicaments
Database service has been restored.
Vote for for Ward 7 GOP City Council. If you are Democrat don't worry, you can vote for him in November 's election RT
If you ever see Gen. Pepper's Chili Cakes on Frenchman then GET ONE!
Follow and keep it on lock from this artist! Lots going on here!
true story.
On the way to games I stop at QT at 157 & hwy10 and buy them. Saturday they didn't have my flavor. So I didn't have seeds.
ya gotta add jeff to that too lol he is just as bitter if not more
Today's the last official Last Thursday (street closed) and possibly the last nice day of the year...Come out to Alberta St. and live it up!
Live, at the Digital Journalism Camp...
you should :)
i love you more
What dates do you need for orlando?
I spot a trend, and then I get ahead of it ~ Madonna
so basically they swapped 2nd rd picks with NE for a 6th, and two 7th rounders?
whats going on, i sent you a email over on your face book page, can you take a look and tell me what you think.
peace everybody.
nice sentiment, but how will they get paid? This will get abandoned like other mid market ventures.
He Dumb . I Just Hung Up ,
I love the holidays and seeing the rest of my family
it can be lonely sometimes.
The worst part about this Capitals-Rangers series is that someone has to advance.
You mean like how he lets go of the bat as soon as he starts his swing?
Kidding....kind of. Im def craving a breakfast sandwich though.
Wow. Yeah, she could have planned better but you'd really begrudge her trying to keep an eye on her kids during flight?
great performance on tribute to the troops
i lovey yew too (:
Sad to think about that this is the last college basketball game for a long time
I love being in the 160-180 BPM range :) SO MUCH FUN!
Plenty of single rich guys up in Plano. Need an intro?
Closet of ROCK is more like it!
“Happiness is not a station you arrive at, but a manner of traveling.” - Margaret B. Runbeck
#oomf had that same tweet like 15 seconds before you did. lol
I try.
my theory from earlier: bento only wants yes men. That's his style of play...
: great quotes
Im bored any ideas on what to do today.
is finalizing content for 944 SD's Nov. FOOD Issue!! Speak now or forever hold your peace! Email any final pitches to me at
this friday coming up..on arlington
Was Gangster Squad thrown together to reup the Dick Tracy rights or something?
um. your bio.
i watched the whole 10 minutes of that ..<3
"Cocaine for breakfast yikes! Met her a coachella ...."
ah, i wanna watch 90210 :(
IT'S MY BIRTHDAY TODAY AUSTIN!!!!✊
Was just reading your tweets - so much positive energy in so few characters...amazing! Thanks for following...
. will sing for Jesus just to fit in at school, but would "...never violate his core principles..." what a joke
Did you win?
Max Server memory for #SQL = Total Machine Memory - 4GB for OS is what it should be set. Blasting SP sites tip;
"Ya'll know me... Yeah OPP!" #THON12 good job!
Bunnies are all over the place
U meant every day working people right? have u-- or do u know anyone who has-- actually bought someone a CAR for holidays?
Well, the Xbox can't get pregnant?Rosettafr19
you are right! clearly i am a horrible daughter. May 12th is then.
shout out
“Life’s tragedy is that we get old too soon and wise too late
Excited for the stretch run.. we should have some new characters in Omaha this year!
Survived a Bulgarian movie w/Spanish subtitles with surprising ease. Left me wanting to learn Backgammon.
That kind of active solicitation of feedback from colleagues cd offer qualitative evidence of impact.
yea buddy
red bull :)
you read this somewherere?
RT : It's happening tonight! We're on at 1.30, we've got withdrawal symptoms after a day off in the sun!
Unpopular opinions I hold #6: I don't like Roombas.
hi i love you you are beutiful girl can you follow me ? i jasminator of spain one pregunt what ' s your colour fovourite?
Bubba wins!!! Yeah Masters champ!!!
how do u get to post on my account? I dont follow u and u dont follow me... Spam
I do agree. :) I'm see The Dictator tonight & then kids' sports all weekend.
How do I get a cartoon face like ?
Fantastic customer service and low pressure sales. I've returned for service because of no BS policy.
Students at the path throwin up Greek signs. Ran in the office and grabbed my pen with my MacBook on the side of my hip
I think they should have a Barbie with a buzz cut.
I ain't gone lie I wish it could be though !
Phew! Finally secured my Timbers 2011 season tickets!
Looking good, Luis. Stay warm over at that windy, chilly HDC. You could borrow one of those beanies that Beckham wears.
Phillip Phillips is singing last so it's clear the producers want him in the finale. :-/ ...can't wait to watch tonight anyway.
Don't be a baby-cry, cause cry-babies won't make it through the night.
Best of luck sir! I'll send some positive energy ur way Interview for pt teaching job in milwaukee on monday
love to hear that! Thank you for all you do...
Salmon Fishing in the Yemen (2011), Horrible Bosses (2011), Melancholia (2011)
vs Think of it as Chris Bourque fighting Scott Gomez.
Tornado watch bitchh :D
shuddup all you attention whores!
Once again eating alone. "You don't wanna sit there. Aaron Schock's boyfriend is gonna sit there."
Holy black mamba!
just like tennis if you serve well you will seldom lose in life... #NoKidHungry needs your service. serve the
#imagine You and Niall just got done kissing for hours, he grabs your face & says, "I don't ask for alot bc with you I have everything."
Aw, how cute! Adorable book.
": Knock 'em dead on the road, y'all!" Thanks fam. That means a lot coming from you. Much appreciation
Bump your bank. We have some great Credit Unions in the area, consider one today
“: Grace is the face that love wears when it encounters imperfection "/AMAZING!!
What stations do you like? I LOVE it when I'm typing reports or doing my social media marketing activities. Just curious.
I just did
are you kidding?!?! Scrapple is everything those guys stand for in gastronomy!
Yeah, still here on planet New Orleans
All of Saxbys' staff will be wearing their pink ribbons in honor of Breast Cancer Awareness Month.. Are you wearing yours?
You mean Black Beauty has gone to the glue factory?
DJ Pipster... Bringing the funk! Ha...
I always think my kids are not well behaved, and then I meet other people's kids.
Paco's 11-1-11 is coming. Don't miss it. Stay tuned for details.
I really am moving lol
so nasty.
So, what's everyone's St. Paddy's plans? Also, does anyone know how to make a cocktail with Baileys, Jameson and Lucky Charms?
Having one of them days when I wish I could smoke or drink something.. Smh
Trivia Q Day 1: What did Pierce Egan add to the basic eggnog recipe when he created a variation of eggnog called "Tom and Jerry."
Must move on with my day...now I'm just obsessing.
Tweet to compete. Ready to learn at
great #election coverage from the best of the best on right now!
BIG UPS ON THE XXL COVER U DESERVE IT BIG UPS....
Do you know there is app called the luck of the Irish? You have a countdown for St. Patricks day!
How could you not love #OKC!!!
#ThingsIThinkAboutWhileTextingYou thank you for making an effort to keep this conversation going, unlike everyone else.
Gogurt are good at four in the morning.
": bitch I'm a thug by nature just cus a n***a don't love you don't mean I hate ya.... ()"
can't wait to meet July 9th :3
It's neat to see what people are pinning from your website. See it at: pinterest. com/source/YOURSITE.com
Me and are watching a movie called Dance Fu featuring Kel..from Kenan and Kel
If OSU beats Kentucky in the nat'l title game and Kansas makes the final 4, I'll win the pool.
you are the man!! Hope we can meet up soon :) Happy New Year!!!
“: Spend less. Save more” that's what it's all about
dude school is ending in a week and a half, this year went by crazy fast.
Bummer! RT New fleece from just arrived. Wrong size! We leave for the trip on Friday...
#mybestfriendsof2011 Liz, GG, Raye, Billy, Lisa, Nick, Music, Marry, Ali and E.
Ideas And Ideas For Inspiring Panorama Designs For Your House ...
Nice article. Anyways, you're going to get sick from chicken and unwashed veggies in same bag, plastic or not.
Every time we say, "Let there be!" in any form, something happens. -Sheila Terrill Man.
pretty good... I have to go to court later ;( divorce/child support!!! Wish me luck!
What an amazing Derby Week! Getting a few house things done then getting ready for nashville and memphis this week!
no I dont
I can't think of a better way to spend my Saturday afternoon than going to Eric & Alex Dorman's wedding with some awesome professors.
Ur as real as real can get!!!
*The Marine
The rapstress will hitting the road on a 14-date trek...
Thanks for the RT this morning & ! Hope your week is off to a great start.
you're welcome! enjoy cc RT : Sweet potato #popchips are amazeballs!! Thanks for the vday treats
Someday you'll come out of nowhere n into my life.
Greed and Envy? Whatever you are smoking, you better put it down, dude. Cuz your perception of reality is severely disturbed.
i just listened to your songs and they're great! :)..i love "Piece of My Heart" <3
Rode the tandem 57 miles today.
Hola!!! I'm not on here much lol so sorry for the late reply!
Making brownies for a special someone. So domestic, it's gross.
wish i could be with my boobear :(
Thinking bout getting Cork Floors!“ Be creative w/it, & create checkerboards, herringbones & brick patterns or custom cuts.”
Soon ima get fed up and blow up a spot
Greg Wilson in LA TONIGHT!!
you look beautiful snook!!!! keep up the hard work!!!!
loves finding other people's shopping lists left behind in carts... "what are they making that they need that!? oh they have a dog" :)
THANK YOU! LET'S BE BFF'S AND WATCH OLD MOVIES.
Have you ever followed, or unfollowed, someone solely because of their avatar?
Some people just make me laugh. What a night!
Without the bitter the sweet isn't as sweet.
anytime doll
signed up. You?
Adventures witth holly and mandy!(:
Our treatment focuses on a woman’s distinct characteristics, helping her to overcome addiction and live up to her potential.
How are people not going out of their minds cheering right now?
'Canes on Center Ice w/ "as bad a defensive performance" as Montreal commentator has seen this year. Score is 4-0. Pathetic.
Just liked it. Follow me, pleasee ??? :D
i'm getting a context high.
Happy birthday mate! :)
Did you like that video? We stumbled across it by accident, you can get some good stuff for $5.
RT : Sometimes its hard not to think about our past, but in the end it helps us with the decisions in our future.
Reading a great play called Stage Black by Lydia R. Diamond. So funny!
Some days being a community manager is really rewarding! Today is one of them. Love connecting with my clients' customers!
I just follwed u
everyone needs to follow this kid!
able to speak in tongues, something like it comes natural....you need to start reading the bible more sir.
What a beautiful launch!!! GODSPEED SPACE SHUTTLE ENDEAVOUR ON YOUR FINAL VOYAGE!!!!
Thanks for the RT, Paul.
I'll be looking for any opossum subway friends hitching a ride this week, hah
Come by Evolve Discovery's booth 222 for a chance to #win an #Ipad2!
Those annoying ass bitches on the bus who were screaming and singing can eat a fucking dick.
I love you Kanye West!
That's done by every dictatorship.
sure and the next thing they are going to tell you is that a "Like" equals loyalty.
I need at least one more day... Not a fan of spring break being over :(
The same! Minus the remote problem. Haha
I've seen most of them....every week.
thanks man! You are going to love our new stuff!
Today is the fair! Yeeee!
The Scream tweets! - What version are you? #aam2012 I predict in the future more museum objects will have a voice.
sign n trade
My coolness'o'meter just tallied up the points. You both come to equal scores.
“: Great set last night!” thanks for having us!
upset. already.
Okay, I will do that, living my life in Chicago while you troll all the Packer Backers like they are your friends, ya der hey
Fantasy draft-spawned rumor? Twitter starting to buzz that Peyton Manning is done for the year. Is it true? No idea. Hope not
Thanks for following us back. We are in Philadelphia, PA but I know the weather in the Caribbean is great today. Thanks
I'm the type of nigga that don't let beef ride. You know that Jay.
Take advantage of this Beautiful Day!! Get out and support local business!! Freshest Breakfast Tacos in Town. You tell us how to make it.
on Wednesday :)
you just calm down. I have a present for you too.
I still haven't done my homework(:
Put peer-review at beginning of publishing process.
got to say, I've really been enjoying of late
He At Thee Edge -.-
Playin hooky today - no work! So what do we do on our day off??? We volunteer at ! Stay tuned for our next volunteer night!
Finally getting around to voting in the hottest 100
« I don't know whether my stubbornness is my greatest strength or my biggest weakness.»
These bitches can't cut in to business, I'm in love with to business
Good morning Twitter Family, off to Oxford Michigan for a dress rehearsal for the independent SiFi movie "CK 42.
Marqueal Jordan and the Players LIVE @ Red Kiva, April 18th! Show starts at 9 PM! Can you dig it Chicago?
we need volunteers to help us collect petition signatures at #rally4sanity. Interested? send us a DM.
Also the word "atheist".RT : Among those who don't understand it, few words have justified more nonsense than "Socialism."
Thanks for the twitter follow & facebook like, !
when my thoughts are silent i start hearing Master P rap in my head... a gift & a curse
yes, very beautiful...
is your icon from an actual photoshoot? i love it!
Jimmy John's <3
u must have forgotten Ravens already smashed the Texans #getreal location pic? I think so
From Justn (7:55pm): Showers in central WI have nearly fallen apart. Look for sprinkles in FDL & Sheb. Co. before 11pm.
no really when
uh absolutely! I'm always up for a fun time in New York!
omg! i've actually traveled that bridge with your big bro---while it was snowing very hard! he kept telling me to take pics
Many thanks sir! ... I'll keep my eyes open for HEARTLESS.
I love you bum. Don't you have some gay thing like school to be laying attention to ? Lmaooo
Teach your child not to give direct eye contact to a dog as this can be seen as confrontational behavior
We have gone #redandblack in support of Canterbury. Our thoughts are with our friends and families in need..
What does it say about CeeLo that he's always stroking a pussy...cat?
sky blue ITS THE BEST :)
I hate getting penalized for someone else's mistakes.
like father, like son.
HEY MAHOMIES GIVE ME SHOUT OUTS AND RT MY TWEETS PLEASE <3 i'll be sending A DM to Austin Mahone recommending Mahomies for him to follow (c)
TOTAL desperation.
here's six words: "Trayvon Martin was a whole person." This country is showing a harsh backward turn to 3/5 discourse.
Where are you headed w/your #sweetie in #SanDiego tonight? Last years #vday was spent on #lajolla beach with my sweet & a bonfire!
Congrats to for winning a silver medal for their Bottle Rocket Lager!
I'm kind of partial to your 997th tweet, myself. :) Thanks.
Break that single making waves!
Scores come out January 6th.
I am going to be completely spoiled by Nationwide. The UE team is top notch - great work, great personalities. Thanks for a fun contract!
Today's episode will be up a tad later in the day but is currently uploading and should be live soon! It'll be worth the wait on this one.
why hello snowstorm... where did you come from?
Why Thank you lol RT Studs are so fuckin sexy
Daily, life is a challenging job, you lose interest, you lose the pattern.
Touring 12Stone Church
Totally in! Who is supplying the ketchup?
cant wait for this #NYR game tn
Deprived of sleep, our eyes glazed over from staring at computers, our faces twitching, alternatively guzzling coffee and chugging beer...
It's a great day to go car shopping - and the last weekend of the Biggest Sale of the South!
u already got it guy?
Oh I miss Ginuwine & his videos!
#WhyILoveMuseums - The history alone is inspiring and motivating. I also love how technology can give you a more engaging perspective.
Dang where #bowwownation I don't see anyone on my timeline.... Aww man I know y'all boys still up lol #UnderratedTour June 12th Hot Right Na
Let's get it! RT : #Salute & Mad Respect For The Homie !! Real Talk..! Big Reason Allur Came My Way & Seen My Vision...
GLASSHOLE! What a headline
Waiting for aunt samantha ensemble on ohio drive FDR
Why take out the good stuff? Revolution Cider is unfiltered, allowing its natural flavors to shine through. Philly bars, here we come!
We have a few days left if you want to get into our April mailing. Hurry! Phone lines are open!
Why can mcdonalds never get anything right
“: There are two kinds of friends : those who are around when you need them, and those who are around when they need you.”
Wait, What?!?!? #wherecanihear? RT Listening to a rough cut of the new Kingsizemaybe song
I thought you said you missed school to run away with aliens.
Merry xmas eve too0o all...i love you all so much...stay sexy.
this is the best day of my life.
He was 14 I think but i'm stuck on the question about the colour of his drums. On one of her videos he's playing (c)
UMinn astronomers part of team that's discovered buckyballs in solid form in space. You can't say "buckyballs" without giggling.
I just started training. I joined the y to get the swim down. Now working on the run
Oh man, plan retards are the worst! RT what the hell is wrong wit yu is yu dumb or just plan retarded
good luck today!!!!! The show last night was AWESOME!
tomorrow afternoon.
NICE!! #golf shoes have come a long way!
i was pretty sure i was on the bus w/ keisha cole's mom. then i heard her say, "i'm keisha cole's mom!"
Should I at least wait until 930 to go to bed on a Saturday night..hm
it was a great fight. Id watch a rematch.
This week we visited this week!!! We met some GREAT students!!!!
YEAH BUDDY:)
cool, thanks! :)
That's a good one!
It's like, flooding outside. I love it (:
I dunno, man. You totally rock the red hair.
So where are the platforms that can handle massive scientific communication flow and meet requirements of research communication?
AUTHOR'S NOTE: I've got to do this every few months. The Is A Joke Page. U dont have to @ yell at me for something Steve King said.
Hybrid Staff = mix of notation and sequencer staff. Only in NOTION3!
we better get in the kitchen where we belong, gurl :(
#HowAboutWe never talk again do me that favor .
Monday Night Football! Who do you have winning tonight? Colts or Bucs?
so I just saw a sonic commercial. they now have sweet potato tots! um, yum.
Radware Collaborates With IBM to Help Customers Achieve ...
🚭 knock it off, Deen.
Fuck not having a hat! That shits my trademark.
forgot its sunday relaxed but bored i wanna chill wit sum one
Do not fucking use me to feed your addiction. Go fuck yourself, seriously.
thanks for the follow!!
“ Every act of rebelling expresses a nostalgia for innocence. ” — Albert Camus
Gin isn't a vegetable, silly, it's a fruit!
RT : Glad to be a part of this and so excited. <--- Yayyy Cc:
you freidns to add me as we need friends and 100000 hits this month to help keep us
Thank God !! somebody took a post off for me I couldn't get to on my phone .. I have a shot gun.. Just shoot me please.. What a day :O
Giving teachers more effective instructional materials much easier path to boost quality of instruction than changing personnel policies.
yea I am. Havent seen it in a while
No woman is to good to cheat
I will read This article when I finish the first one you suggested.
I dunno, our new EP is pretty epic…just sayin and will it say again.
thanks! today's a perfect day for a ice cream'wich!
RT Ready to watch my UK boys play!!
thanks for spreading the word!
So long Inge and good luck in Oakland.
Usually when I say "Ugh what is this?" the answer is "Muse". Just not my thing.
which part have you been to?
It's the 1 year anniversary of the day my lovely agent sold an oddball novel about true love and robots to my adorable editor. *Fireworks!*
Shite. Damn me & my cash flow issues.
I already have. The past is the past, man.
Omg I love kenpo! :D I could do this every day!
Check out our Allure Wig, right here on our twitter profile & let us know what you think!! www.drwiggys.com or email
lol we'll drink to that!
I feel so mad & angry & frustrated & depressed & confused & lost I just wanna punch through a fucking wall
Can't focus
#liespeopletell I have read and agree to the terms of use.
What a great Final Table in Jacksonville for the WPT. out of the booth, Buzgon in the POY mix with Faillia! Oh...
this ldubb from the shrine on wednesday jus tryna more info on this tour
See our new products, 10 candle warmers and over 80 fragrances
#TampaBay has the best attractions
Then what do u call it? Lebron got MVP again and u hate on da kid smh
Unruly Music festival countdown 7: so-new-the-ink-is-still-wet music from Chicago electroacoustics wizard Chris Mercer on March 8.
And my arms need someone Someone to enfold To keep me warm when Mondays and Tuesdays grow cold
I don't think Thinking Bout You by Frank Ocean will ever get old ♥
No plans tonight have to be to work to early in the morning
Follow my GURL
- That is probably the next place Google would like to "map it up" at... Well, if Heaven is in space, that is...
I feel like I got stabbed in my stomach -.-
bro your so dope easily my new favorite MC, LiveLove∆$∆P is a #CLASSIC!!!!!!!!!!!
that's quite cool. Hope it comes with free parking...
Just finished my first day as a student teacher librarian! Going to red sox game tonight. Great day, I think. . .
Yes Mt Monday sounds great!
glad you fixed that mane lol!
The First Lady of Virginia jumping out of a perfectly good airplane for our brave military members. Hightlights on 19News Nightcast
A Hawk and a Hacksaw Jim Duggan
Hate having corp email on this phone. Autolocks every stinken time .
you weren't smiling that baby smile of yours, so i couldnt tell lol. :p
whats everybody else up to
10 Miles!!! Thanks for the good luck wishes :)
I could eat these freakin' pralines ALL DAY without stopping.! Junks good asF'.!
Shout out to all our new followers! Send us a tweet, and we'll follow you back! Be sure to check us out on Facebook if you haven't already!
Defender : Defeater is next! Then Lords of Discipline, Burn The Ides and lastly Bounty Hunter. Still plenty of time to get to The Loft!
Can't get much uglier than this. Hanie is incompetent.
Congrats on your graduation!!!
Should your resume match the qualifications and experience of any of our job openings, one of our experienced recruiters will contact you.
PLEASE COME TO IRELAND SOMETIME! much love xo
Yay! Hi! Glad you like the pic.
Muhammad chooses UCLA.
i love the remix of sombody to love :)
we're you the smart girl in class? If so you would have hated me. He sleeps through class and gets an "A" WTF!
finishing dinner for the boys, will come when done
fight me
Aww, you're crying because of that song? Aw, hfjdkfjhgf. You're to cute. hgfkjhgfjdks. ♥
#CyberMonday hourly deal - Save $500 on a #Disneyland Package (through February) and get a free $50 Disney Gift Card! Call us at...
Not watching that hate mongering cretin. Shame on you,
why is it always when I'm not working celebrities come into veggie grill?
After all these years your just NOW following me!?! Sheesh.
-Ironman or Hulk? :D
BIG thanks to the readers of who have made #Buffalo's "BEST RADIO PERSONALITIES" for an unreal 8 STRAIGHT YEARS!
Rip Hamilton wears so many accessories I don't see how moves when he's on the floor.
I do, too, and others than taxes and MCLE, you can't say that ;)
RT Support Phi Theta Kappa Honor Society! We'll be selling tamales (beef, pork, chicken) rice & beans in front of student center!
Google's Jules Verne logo deserves to be a #TT - the #UX responsiveness feels "underwater" in a very pleasing way.
my net is down-mayb I can bring my beats to da studio,if its possible
Thank you for the mid week hello!
Thanks! [checks in the mail ;) ] RT : logo design is great!! Very talented and does high quality work!!
Wait i just forget wat iwas about to say...
A jealous woman does better research than the FBI. Lmao
Relaxation and motivation create success
lamb will backup the point and miller/gilchrist can give you some mins at the 2. Spot mins from beckham 2nd semester at both spots.
awesome news! Congrats!
I just saw a Chris Brown lookalike, he was sexy !
haha, do you skype with people on there birthday
i absolutely love your new EP! Cant wait for the album xx :)
Thanks homie.You see the flyer? We're going in!!
Todaii is my b-day and if u follow me i will give u a follow back :D
Cuz' shit might pop off and if shit pop off, someone gon' get laid the fuck out.
hi austin that was beautiful<3 #saysomethin omg asdfghj
This sleeping pill is startin to kick in 🌙
It is Jan 2010 and the credits for buying and selling homes goes away in April 2010, THE TIME TO ACT IS NOW. Call me 585-455-2443
Skyping with !!!! ALWAYS puts me in a better mood whenever i see her face! :)
Please telling me you're watching Weaver's no hitter
aint that the truth
yeah right
I showed an “emotobook” to Shannon not too long ago and she kept flipping to the abstract emotional art. I think I got her hooked. LOL!
THERE'S a shock.
not sure how I unfollowed you and but fear my iPhone neophyte'ness is to blame. ;)
Music on the patio with Three Chord Rodeo cancelled tonight due to cold wind. We will def have them back next season!!
2012 and 2013 Volkswagens Preview by Carey Russ +VIDEO
. Oops RIP Donna Summer without the s at the end.
Illinois Senate panel votes down pension reform measure - Chicago Tribune
On the floor rolling! cc
thank you! #FF RT Have a good one
Yeah but still, it's been bugging me for a while now. I think they just gave up after finding that out.
Treating myself to a double-cupped coffee at my fav coffee house on earth, at home in the 585 with my dad and uncle Jeff. Boom
i make this sore throat my bitch.
WHATS UP PRETTY LADY SO HOW WAS YOUR NEW YEARS EVE I KNOW IT WAS MAJOR
Hey Dolls! Whatcha doing tonight? Seeing Of Dolls & Murder at the Scottsdale Museum of Contemporary Art?
Can they be hugging? RT : Naked RT : #ThingsThatINeed More photos of on the beach
Goodnight everyone and peace! 8)
have a great Birthday weekend G3!! God bless
let's get some starbucks ! 😉
u wanna go to jail or u wanna go home#training day
Now my fingers swollen & knt move : (
Uh oh - will do. Thus far it's making the bus commute go faster, which I will take!
Wedge issues divide,that's the purpose ,we don't have to agree on Everything. The news ALWAYS want a fight, they make$. The Other side wins!
#humantrafficking is an underground industry. Its hard 2 get exact stats on ppl U cant find
Sharing ideas at #upstream2012: Seek opportunities to implement programs and use of apps at existing school gatherings.
shaving points > shaving pussy
i thought they called you. I almost shouted lol
on Austin City Limits. Awesome!
😂😂👍👍RT : My feelings for you, no words can tell... Except maybe, "go to hell."
Hopefully today will go by fast cuz I miss my bed already
Hoorah!! All hail the Rae!! :-D!
storming super bad out in northeast ohio right now . Here comes 2012!
one costume id love to see in is his birthday suit...so sexy
Cheers to All-Star Weekend, I'll drink to that ya ya!
Jahahahahaha u rite ill be sure to watch my back
just another birthday was flawless. Ugh, so amazing <3
I hate how last year my school gave field trip forms for Senior skip day and not this year... This is so unfair!!
IN the mall?!? Omg..
Saw a billboard advertising weaves described as "virgin" hair...and the opposite of virgin hair is...?
RT people are now chanting "down with the dictator" and "God is Great" on the roofs.
everytime I step in that class in get a headache.
I ask alot of questions ..
Holy god this woman drives so slow.
Today's the day we find out what we are having, just a few more hours to go.
get one?
I have a mission
Neither candidate really answered the question about bringing recycled water to North County.
OK, so or Koriente! Thanks!! Maybe I'll drag the #pubmedia folks there this aftn -- ur welcome to join
Upgrade from Drupal 5 to 6 ... someone must've installed the bug generator module ... **%&%$!!!
Well, industry has a weaker overall defense (noncommercial edu use significant) so might be hard to maintain united front there.
it's def crystal!
watchin Rachel Crow's performance singing Justin Bieber's Baby and singing along.
Some people are so ridiculous
my dad was fucking pissed off (he was designated driver b/c he doesn't drink)
yeah either you do or you don't. I love it. I just hope it's not my destiny.
Wake up rocking: 'Spring Awakening' a fresh, musical take on tale set in 1890s
But isn't the point that we can't roll back the stone on our own? When they came to the tomb, it was already rolled back!
did you guys enjoy? Feliz?
SHOUT OUT TO OUR OPERATIONS MANAGER Fred J. Sweet!!! HAPPY BIRTHDAY!
Too cold over here in Dallas :(
Good for you! Maybe we'll join you for walk!
I can't give away your costume! I can't wait to put you into a costume contest this year :)
I think she wanted to clear it out so she could have 1st pick of the bargains. It worked.
their rookie being on IR already & Beanie & Step-Howl listd as Q, who's the RB for AZ?
love peter pan lol
Cliche to say it at this point, but, sorry, it's true: is some kind of genius. She's like Jane Austen-cum-Mary McCarthy
. Agreed. We need to help our women get more book learnin' so they can put on shoes and get out of the kitchen.
Temple vs St. Joes at the Pollestra
Found us!
It was bound to happen, I guess.
Current bid is $1500, do I hear $1600?
#thatmoment when somebody twitpic a picture of their food & it look nasty af. ha.
Great! Thanks! Can we upload the pics? I'd be happy to help or do that for you.
only the prompt. And I have the app. I understand the extra step, but speed kills. What's the click through? 50%?
shrink wrap sealer and poly. crimper?? Demos? Where to buy?? Suggestions appreciated.
Hahaa everything you tweet is so relevant to my life :)
thanks :) she looks soo beautiful :)
thanks man it definatly was
Let's get it son.
i like this guys work. found him through various links randomly. very glad i did. super cool.
TONIGHT Ub's Restaurant & Bar(live Music Venue) Cheap Drinks and Dope Hip Hop all night with DJ DBX of the World Famous Versatile DJ's...
That would be lulz. "DONT LEAVE. WE'LL UNSUBSCRIBE YOU FROM CAT FACTS, PROMISE"
who was so kind as to give you those lovely flowers?
Tell your man how sexy he is, take him out to the movies sometimes he likes it just as much as u do
They'll be fine. They have to be fine. We're a-ok..
Feeling slighted by Google. No Wave invitation for me. Did I offend Google when I used Bing one time?
Come on Knicks u can't go out like Dallas!
The Exlibris Mid-Atlantic (EMA) regional user group meeting will be THIS evening at 5:45pm in the Omni Fort Worth 2
Pinapples in (KEVIN HART VOICE!)
no-u check ur email!
Which son borrowed money from his parents for college?
Woops. Apparently that was my second birthday invite I made
Gonna go hit the gym right now !
Got to wonder why Fitworks would bring a case of Red Bull to AHS to give to student athletes. Sorry Fitworks, we promote work not gimmicks!
been done. Austin Powers.
Anytime. hi there☺
when are you playing at dim mak?
This is some BS
Thanks for the RT Caprice!
right ?! I never ride anything a meth-head can assemble in an afternoon !
"Your Face Is like A Poem"
Damm #stanthonys has a bad azz basketball team... #10 already has 26 points and there only in the 2nd quarter. Top it off he's only 5'2!!!
Ha ha ha I want a champ shower bath! That's two in one!
First pick or not, A-Gon going from a pitchers wonderland to a hitter oriented ball park is going to juice his stats
mmkayy let me grab mah purse
lax site is looking awesome. Cheers. Total
"What concert tickets cost only 45 cents? 50 Cent featuring Nickelback" Bitch, You couldn't pay me to go to that shit concert.
One of my favorite pastimes on Twitter is when utilizes the fake RT trick.
are they texting "i'm having sex right now and it sucks"?
Cat + Veggie crisp = VERY unhappy kitty. Dummy took the cracker & was down the hall B4 he figured out it didn't taste so good after all.
Thanks for sharing your blog! I enjoyed the Mr. Potato Head story.
Told my husband I tweeted Ben, he says "Who? The guy with the hair?"
Taco is cute as fuck
it is hot as fuck i need me a cold beer or 2
Last Buckner = perspective = perfect
#modevux keynote take away ppl want "relevant, easy, valuable" deals - Mark Jamison, vp digital innovation lab, CapitalOne
you got it girl! I can't wait!
I can't stare t my monitor any more today.
Sometimes ghostwriting a Twitter is beyond stressful. Big comments made for a big group through your lens. Have to trust their trust.
Who gone throw a super bowl party?
More new beers! Feeling dazed and confused? Have a Hazed & Infused; packs a hop smack sure to clear out the cobwebs
4/17 Forgetting Lydia, Maesion, Fakade, New AC, and more at Finleyville Community Center tickets are $10 message me if you wanna go.
A girls night is wat i need so bad but everybody so busy now smh!
good morning! *am I offering real or invisible coffee? *
You Should Follow Me!! I'm sorry I keep buggin you dude... It's just that it would be creaking sweet if you followed me!!(:(:
In dire need of a touch from the Lord just let me know that you're there
Went with a late harvest Torronte's
what's the most inspiring piece of scripture to you?
Sandstorm Gold Recognizes Record Gold Sales and Operating Cash Flow of US$9.3 ... - SYS-CON Media (press release)
Apparently it is Crazy Day. Must have missed the memo.
For you runners out there...try RunKeeper for the iPhone and Android. Very cool. www.runkeeper.com
Lol i agree. RT : I always thought Papa Smurf had traits inherent to a cult leader
Promiscuous boy you already know that I'm all yours what u waiting for?
I knowww, this summer! (:
Following kinda sounds like stalking.. You follow me, I'll follow you back. Stalkers n-n <3
u r a font of wonderful information. Crop dusting's nothing. U should hear some of what my flight attendant friends tell me.
let's hope google assistant is not to siri as google+ was to facebook :((((
I'm so over everything at this point. I hate people.
Alright, sleeping pills. You can kick in anytime now... 💊
lol...love that you called me BuddahMom..son calls me that too.... ;-))
So I got a sample of Selena Gomez's Fragrance in the mail today . I Love the smell of it ((:
Catching up with my old bestfriends from ELEMENTARY. Omg.
Six years ago I was Baptized, Praise God for my transformation. I pray that My Father continues His good works within me. Vote for BA
Anyone get a chance to stop by our new Cranberry location? What did you think?
Fuckkkkk yeah w. for this whole semester 👌
he's so adorable awww
Finally off.
Tweeting I'm class
are parents so eager to get rid of their kids that they stay in a hotel the night before move in day? ...
That sounds gr8. 9 is such a great age! And there are so many great things to do in Richmond. It's supposed tobe a perfect day!
If anything else wants to blow up in my face today, I'm going to do the mature thing and pretend I didn't notice.
that sounds lovely
Definitely agree it's not just Twitter. Which question were you responding to?
Oh no, but I posted something to you today that I think you would be able to happily waste time on!
Never thought I'd see a video like this come from you. I really like the message a lot, love to sit and chat more about it.
HAPPY THANKSGIVING IM THANKFUL 4 AN AMZING FAM A WONDERFUL SON & AN EXTREMELY FULL LIFE LIV, LUV, LAUGH O YEA & EAT ALOT
wait, Zeus has a beard?
In San Diego an estimated 8,800 people are #homeless and 25% have mental illness. Housing Matters. Raise awareness! HousingMattersSD.org
So Fox showed all those videos and cut all the walkouts, yet they only left 15 minutes for a 25 minute fight? I don't get it.
Ribs the remix! #webequeing yeah e yeah e
Can you say 'snakebit'? Tyler Seguin splits the defense, comes in alone, square on the goalie...and shanks it. Not #Bruins night, or month.
That's true, you made me want to give you my spare change haha. I'm doing pretty well, making some splash here in beantown.
": In every innocent face there's a freaky side."
Good morning twitter land. What's good?
hideous on anyone but the model wearing it.
This needs fact checking RT : #pdx #mayorconvo -- in NY, only 33 times did police officer discharge weapon
Walkthru any hood counting a stack of money
I can't lie; I've probably done that to my hubby. Although, not with a cardigan.
Goodnight y'all!
Oh Downton Abbey, say it isn't so! I 'm in the middle of season two, and no longer streaming it online.
Today's #BookWhore Tip: One cannot create buzz about a book by being silent.
Our website has been hacked. Back online as soon as possible.
Nobody likes a rat
A little tired. But currently texting a new friend.
Hah, it was! I was getting mad.
Thanks for following Poised Creation on Twitter!
Stupid cancer.Some of us want a new car.A new cell phone.To lose weight.But someone battling cancer wants just one thing,to win that battle.
yes! Aha
I hate it. Mainly because my teacher is foreign and I can't understand his accent, and he sucks at teaching lol
So when are you gonna tweet me? (:
Drinking water from a wine glass. Because I am just that classy.
took out the ferrari last night? :P
WiFi! Canada! Toronto! Horseshoe! Horrid border crossings! Exclamation points!
What a great afternoon! Thanks to all who attended my chat about Theme Days!
our eyes are placed in front because it is more important to look ahead than to look back
Rock and roll showed up for this #Grammmys — D'Angelo needs to come HARD this year and ride for Black music.
why cant the whole world speak one language?
welcome back, fellow traveler
at least Los Angeles is pretty sweet.
Happy Monday everyone unless your Garfield the cat who would say "I Hate MONDAYS "
Flying home from Boston to SD. Just a stop at JFK.
A little sweat ain't never hurt nobody! RT : High of NINETY today? Lolwut.
Great Advice, again.
my phone and i cant get on facebook so shut the fuck up
wanted to thank you for all your help! Tips and all your info has help me in the archery world.
What happened to that "off the grid" you were talking about?
jc using as his secret want to tweet it up?
hold on i'll show you :D
I hate when babies cry and their parents don't shut them up 😣🔫
It's not about what you did, or what you owned. It's about who you
None of you actually wants to be president.
When I start to hate they way your kisses feel...
be happy :D
So happy to have finally bought my first Sonic Youth record! Better late then never at all, right?
"The cure for anything is salt water. Sweat, tears or the ocean.”
Car fire. Cool. 😒
Sunday will be first Mother's Day without my mom. No wonder I haven't felt like buying cards for anyone. #mother'sday
I just cooked spaghetti myself. 5 min at 50% power. It was great.
Can't wait for our show tonight with and at the crossroads church at 8:30.
Yeah, I think you're right.
Perfect night with the girlfriend. So good I pooped, twice.
It�s good to teach your child not to approach a dog they do not know without seeking permission from the owner first
Happy Mothers Day ♥ :)
Get the school year off to a great start! Chicago teachers get $20 off ANY service! Check out www.stepupfns.com for details
pork chops, country style mash pot and pumpkin stuffed with ice cream
WE DONT RAP WE PAINT PICTURES IM PAINTIN PICS OF U HATIN AS I TWEET
Settling down for the #FinalFour games. I guess March Madness goes on even without Duke.
Nationals relief P Ryan Matteus from Galt, CA making first career AB. FP Santangelo says he can be "best hitting pitcher from Sacramento."
Ugh. Just haven't felt right all day. Throw up or whatever already.
remind me tomorrow
too much so much my grandma & moms ran tha Chi! U don't no bout it!
Who do I gotta smack?
what happens??? lmao
Today's lesson from the medicine cabinet: mixing valerian root & Nyquil causes olfactory hallucination. But you'll sleep.
I love it! Today I decided I need to open a Cancun-themed mini-golf course and call it The Golf of Mexico.
Any #GOP staff or real estate agents looking for downtown Tampa condos or apts to rent during the #RNC?
. #FF Thxs! That's some pretty special company.
We gonna be rich forever
So true! “: The best way to have a good idea is to have lots of ideas. - Linus Pauling #quote”
Having great fun brainstorming with you
thank you for your kind words and support!
Welcome home my friend. Thanks for putting us on the map!! Hail to the Green and gold!! Buzz me.
Yeah, it's definitely not light.
what should I do to get a follow from you? ;))* huh... :D I can do anything<3
Infragistics is not being my friend today...
Spoken word artists! Come out to Thursday 11/10 for the Karaoke/Spoken Word Open Mic Mash-up 7p-10p! Follow us.
Violinist Duane Padilla's new website is up!! Stop on by and say hello! www.duanepadilla.com
Little by little, one travels far.
whats the best way to cook pig heart?
#ThingsWeAllHate having no link on dmoz.org, having the wrong info on dmoz.org, failed attempts to get a link on dmoz.org - Non vias control
Catching blue crabs in your friends canoe... you need to be safer than that.
Got so caught up in this question that I almost lost track of time! Ready to move on to the next question?
Does your business have Branding Standards for your logo, #ABQ? If you don't, you could be damaging your brand.
Hi D! Long time no see. Doing good, how about you?
really? a flip camera? is this contest for elementary kids? We don't do contests anymore actually.
Sending lots of energy to Have a blast at the Charlotte races this weekend! :)
Writing a script or novel? Think how the story and plot goals could be a series. If it sells well, you just keep going. Easier to market.
We are all being called to deepen.
Thank you for the mentions for this weekend's Artisans Fare!
sleeping with my mommy tonight :)
Just leaving the pool after competition water frisbee...this is what I love about summer. Woohoo!
Dear PDX, how did you like that double rainbow? :)
FL Senate Bill 1312 found "Favorable by - Rules; YEAS 9, NAYS 0". We are yet one step closer to guidelines!
Like that's a scary ass thing to think about. Let's be real.
The second floor of Mary's Ace Hardware is like Shangri La.
sure, np I'll bump it later tonight with some improbably witty comment about the basketball pic.
I was happy! #loveyougurrll. :)
Lol what a great tweet RT : Top of the burrito to you as well!
you're gonna drive me crazy you're gonna drive me mad
if you want to stop by the alma mater while you're in town I coach the combo and we'd love to have you man!
#MahomieMemories when Austin would actually remember NSD and eat subway on Wednesdays..
Deng hardly creates his own shot and doesn't beat anyone off the dribble, so for him 2 be successful #DRose has 2 be on the floor
I'm so uptight about crap that it's going to say, live life
You're probably the laziest person ever. :P
Follow me. Lupe Trejo actor,pro wrestler,film,television, entertainment RULES! Live,love,laugh.We are all different and unique.
"What's YOLO?" - Drake Bell
Tebow's interview on prob doesnt help him win the hearts of male #Jets fans....but the ladies - well they def wanna bring him home now
B & M Transmission, Inc. is listed with the Check out our B rating.
Awesome front range contmp quilt guild meeting www.artquilt.org meeting held monthly westminster rec cent
Captain Andy Hillstrand of Time Bandit on Deadliest Catch joins in 10 min.
no, social media means 2way media channel where dialogue is encouraged
Just found out I'm #6 on the Country Chart for Wausau, Wisconsin! Woo!
hope you enjoyed your cookies from ! Come back to Savannah anytime!
hey I watched JERSEY SHORE and I see your swag Has went up to 1,000,000,000,00,000
just came across a recipe for mole (mo-lay) with yumbutter in it. keep an eye out for it soon.
corporate lady who's working from here today waits until he walks away & them goes "he makes you nervous?doesn't he?"
Yeah, I think I'm gonna double dip.
55% of companies will make ratings and reviews a priority in 2010. Shop.org
Just finished these 5 papers, now time to prepare for this final presentation
Love correcting all the bills from the day before. This sucks. So much paperwork
You probably made the mistake of going to work, huh? It was up for a while...
Help a good guy out? RT : Looking for a good general doctor in N. Austin, one who takes pity on those w/o insurance. Anyone?
i wouldv walked out to bro
i dont know what you're talking about...
Come see us tonight at St. Lukes Fall Festival 180th and Greenfield :-)
Women's Soccer. Thanks Good Game
My love handles are sore...how odd.
then eat nukka
can I be in it ?
Two growlers from Turtle Mountain Brewery. Gonna be a good weekend.
totally agree, it's just a "me, too" offering
Just finished my 4/20 mix and rolled one. Sweet. Time to get on my level. >^w^<
black on black leather needs tint windows you can see it tomorrow I'm coming home :)
P. Diddy has a yacht now that's controlled by an iPad
I am the EMPRESS of starting over..it's like a mantle with me.
wait YOUR black shirt!?
#nw "Date Night"
Haha, thank you! They were delicious!! : damn girl you classy. Were they tasty??
Getting ready to go to work. Good things today.
Did I really agree to go to work at 4:30 in the morning on my day off?! What was I thinking?!
Like fat... haha
Hanging out at craft-commerce getting our drink on. Claimed a large table #mw2012 come join us!
What's Your favorite food recipe with beer in it? Post it to Facebook or email us!
agreed. a sacrifice this yr in order to get better in future.
": today is my birthday and it would mean so much if u tweeted me happy birthday!! And a I love you pic lol"
Everyone follow my cuzz He really is my cousin........
Well, at least Gaga made the Top 5. Congrats hun
did i have a chance to get u last year
Back at you!! Have a fabulous weekend!
High roller shot caller big boss
stay out of my shit. Bye.
It doesn’t matter how long you’ve known him. If he’s kept you smiling since day one, don’t lose him.
Don't forget that tonight at 6:30 is Brainstormer Pub Trivia at Cable Car City Pub. Come on in and win some great prizes.
Good cause : help support The V Foundation for Cancer Research Auction on through July 13 Visit espnradio.com
We gonna keep this #f4f real simple you dig...you follow me and I'll follow back.
Are you looking for an original gift our store will be a great place to start.
Misread this as Peanut Jam Butter Man, by the way.
Blah. Dont wanna be home!!
good job with the gf bro
If you don't need sponges, Tarpon Springs is still a great place to buy olive oil and goat's milk sponges!
shut up
Join us in the Colfax Auditorium to watch The Big Year on February 11th at 2:30pm at the Main Library.
Tired Of Being Tired
Just went thru the same experience! What did we do b/4 them! Lol!
Ive found premature tweeting doesnt jinx soo- I potentially just got free tix to 2 nights of Jack White and Alabama Shakes in Nashville :-|
I'm just trying to get u me and tommy together atleast so we can get a practice in I was gonna see if we could jam at ur place..
thank you for the kind words. It's always good to hear that your message is working for people!! Means the word to me.
": yessir" gotta get with you before we bounce
#cancun in the AM mothah fuckaaahsss . With two ugly girls ;)
i followed Idox_Frenchyboy and you BieberHoodies!!!
If he's not willing to pursue you....
Take it slow
I believe that will win!!!!
So thankful for the people in my life. That's it.
At first glance I thought Mark Gromley was going to be a she. This videography is something to be desired
We hope you are having a tremendous day!
thanks for "favorite" on one of our tweets
You're welcome ! We hope you enjoy our sushi and Asian Fusion cuisine.
Terrence Jones a beast in the first half. Go Cats!
she is really cute. I have a bias to my nieces though, as I should!
same here :'( so sad!
Taking every step, with a purpose
I will be using square with a band that tours. Selling merchandise in each venue.
Pre-game my place??
#4wordsbeforesex you're under arrest, bitch
Is anyone else having trouble with Google services on Apple products? Google search, Gmail, calendar not working iPad.
you're welcome
Off to the to do some work
Dont Lose Your Home to Foreclosure, We Work Directly with Banks to Short Sale Your Home at No Cost to You. Scott Benson Realty 972-249-7219
Hahaha #CrazyGirl but love ya x
smile it helps u not kill him
Men set around 2gether talking about what they would do to all these hot women they see daily. Women set around talking about the men they..
that's really strong. bold. you know.
just read your Five and Two post on your blog and was so moved this morning. what a gorgeous place to have a ceremony!
$2.95 OFF Doorstep Delivery! Get your food delivered for you corporate meetings, Lunch, and dinner. Only w/ a
Got a prom dress, wahoo! :)
whenever I see a water top open, I put the lid back on. A poor sap could fall in, get hurt and they'd pay for all medical bills.
FOOD FOR THOUGHT: "When life gives you a hundred reasons to cry, show life that you have a Thousand & One reasons to smile"
I really need to see u and just hug u
I want people to have like side aches and shit
Seriously it's in his Jr High yearbook
time to go to Revel for the big brunch party the rocks new york. then to wine tasting, then to hot soul music with dj moma!
Tip of the day: If you want to go biking but you have a ponytail then alls you got to do is wear a ponytail helmet.
it's not even that good.
Constantly amazed by the awesome talent and get-it-done attitude of the team. Da-uhm!
Beams says clear to be wholesale leader bc of capacity.
Already knew a little bit about it from my time at Amtrak, but it's awesome. Acela has GPS, other trains can use iPhone.
Thanks for the comment, The cover features Pres. Obama. replaced Pres. Obama with Pres. Buchanan.
Don't forget to account for meetings, "X number of meetings and anything over that is at this rate."
clarify, please.
How how how is the weekend already over?? I need 5 day weekends and 2 day work weeks :)
Just watched Penguins win! I really hope the Penguins win this series, I would seriously debate hitting up a Stanley Cup final game..
yes I was!
im so sorry about angel</3
an I need a good chant any suggestions?
#middleschoolmemories 5th period was pretty much a success... #enoughsaid 
Hahaha. Well i have been meaning to see newsies on Broadway....that's far away/densely populated enough for me haha
What a great #Bluetooth #UPF. Wish even more companies decided to test interoperability this way...
So true, So true.
saw our house next year!! 1111 Bowen!!!!!!
Remember when Zak Showalter wasn't athletic enough for the major D1 level? ha.
Rolln up another L I write a spell when I'm woozy.
I am fucking done with every single person in my household.
And finally, the little bit of choreography at the very end of "Cry for Me" between Frankie and Joey.
I hear that. Avatar was the best 3D I've experienced. And I'm sure, call me crazy here, that Ridley will crush that mess.
Police and fire officials investigating possible train verses pedestrian incident near bypass.
ha ha, no am not following u. I hired people to do that! ;)))
get on it if you want me to be able to travel all over the world with you and buy you dinner at salad bars. STAT!
Forgot it at the ranch. I'll tell my pops to bring it up Sunday. We're going the the NWSS rodeo! Git r done.
#Exposed Fraudino is on that biblical shit maybe one day he'll grab reality by the balls
Not only is an entire planet throwing a party...... It's a progressive!
I will (: great!
Aw you got some on deck?
Yeah, things are going great. Enjoy the day!
thx for RT of my Alain Touraine plea. I'll let youknow what I find out!
What song is that cable sports network overusing this year? Thank god there isn't an appropriate Flo Rida anthem
I had to take my bp med she got my blood pressure up
I just realized that I get all of my news from the show. I need to get out more.
I'm pretty sure his campaign is dead.
oh gimme the beat boys and free my soul i wanna get lost in your rock n roll and drift away
I enjoy eating
If you want: Tips on what to say and how to ask meaningful questions at the fair, follow the #TeacherSearch hashtag
I saw it 2 weeks ago and commented on it
True that Keys and sunglasses work 2
I'm trying to look like a lobster & I don't even care.
Teaching at a slightly better time this summer. #sometimesit'sthesmallthings
yes, went to Valencia. Beautiful place. would def go again, just working my way thru pile of paperwork and washing.. boo!
Sure, but that has nothing to do with Brandon Marshall himself is saying.
have fun!!
It's almost #firstfriday & #FriAt5! Can't wait for the festivities!
not gonna talk ill of the dead, but it wasn't Steph
I fucking HATE the song call me magbe
Oh snap! Chris Brown won an award. I just throw a chair out of a window in excitement.
Go Cubs Go!
I totally had the same thought! RT Oh how I wish I could send this to the person without it being seen as creepy.
Cookie brought me Starbucks at 5:30, I'm gonna be off the hinges all night.
I'd still let him have it.
Miss you too Annie La!
congrats of 14 million follows. You deserve every single one! :') <13
I won't. I'm having Siri remind me. She is a huge Eva fan she told me.
oh-oh you remember my bday/spring training/beerfest trip from last year, I hope my tweets were lady-like!
imma DM you a sneak peak of new songs i have for the project give me the email
have a great flight!!!
WSB-TV special on Emory's Old Kingdom mummy. "The Forgotten Mummy"- 10/23 at 7 p.m.
Congratulations to all the women that work hard to be mothers, double congratulations to the women that work hard to not be a mother as well
For those of you who forgot, here is the reminder once again... I HATE MONDAYS!!! Thanks for listening :p
awesome, can`t wait to buy one ! [:
aye, you got yours, back up and let us be happy.
yeah i know! Thanks dude! I'm to mad right now
posted lost dog on Facebook! Heard she was found?
ESD is turning into Fez....ugh
So excited for my YMCA football teams. They have done so great in practice and I know Saturday will prove to be an exciting game day :) Let
RT : come over and make out... I mean hang out with me...
When we keep rehashing the past that's like a dog eating its own vomit: unhealthy & nasty. Spit it out, clean it up, & keep it moving.
I have been hired by to organize their social media and can't track down the person who has this login. What can I do?
you got me pinching myself do you really look like that can i see you close up
Happy Mothers Day mi amor!
People that smoke have 10 times as many wrinkles as a person that does not smoke.
"The minute I'm out of town / My friends get sick, go back on the sauce / Engage in unhappy love affairs (Philip Whalen)
I'm "digging" the new Spring Seasonal you came out with, m...
BRONZE SCULPTURE!
They have either lost confidence that you can help or concluded you do not care
all I've done all day is wait for clients to get back to me. I want my Sunday back.
Wowee...the ancient Greeks could be lascivious and indecorous... Hipponax's and Archilochus's poetry was quite vulgar and lurid...lol
ha! I just saw it. Thx!
Im about to throw this computer against a wall!
RT : "When we say navigate, we really mean understand."
Wide Receiver RT : Free Safety RT : tough love question : what's yo favorite position ?
That's Awesome (:
haters gonna hate. Jasmine gonna "whole new world". mMmMMmMmmMmMMHHHMMMM lol
In 1978, Lichtenfeld founded the non-profit Israeli Krav Maga Association (IKMA) with several senior instructors
Looking for a new intern, twice a week, NYC based if possible! will be a hard man to replace!!!
Oh wow! I've been in my roon for 2 hours! And drank a huge cup of coffee but didn't open a book yet! No hw don either!
yea sumbody touch my baby im swinging
it's about Hollywood!!! HOLLA
Toured all my local grocery stores w/ this weekend. Feeling very positive about my food prospects.
I am enjoying 'The Rhetorical Nature of XML' far more than I initially thought I would.
Contact me directly if you have any questions. (I'm glued to my phone)
SELF MADE!!!
one day I'm going to make another account and just tweet him those things
MOJO - Starts from the inside and radiates out.
adding more content to the #filmcrush website today. new stuff coming soon!
its the good stuff roc
Welcome to Twitter. Don't work too hard :)
Remarkable: After hiding out for two hours, Chancellor Katehi walks to her Lexis past a silent crowd of students.
On the bright side, I don't think Calipari is going to have much trouble finding another five one-and-dones.
Weekend Over :(
the field didn't feel the same tonight without you buddy.
17 New #ROC young #entrepreneurs just graduated. We're so proud of our newest Biz Kid$!
I wish there was an easier way to look at old text messages...
How can you not love robots!
How many of you want me to do a free pendulum past life reading on you? I just posted a new pendulum paper in my Yahoo group.
We're now onto the social media panel. How often do you use social media? Everyday? Once a week? Once a month?
Ain't that America something to see, baby?
Definitely enjoyed it. The Hulk stuff was my absolute favorite.
Feeling amazing right now having a great dinner w my b, Much needed. 😊☺😁
or a tweeting dino. Sue from the field museum? Genius use of twitter.
don't die
I'm okay. Just been keeping busy and then spending too much time on Skype. LOL! How about you? How are you.
Happy Jew Year!
I saw a maiden young and fair, Laid on a snow-white bed; I should have deemed her sleeping there—But they told me, she was dead! (1850)
please Lady Ante... nothing... go away and bring Justin!!
hahaha me to ! (-: I also listen to Tech N9ne,Eminem,Immortal Techniuqe,Royce Da 5'9,Game,J. Cole,OF
Yeah, but you could rollover the cap space by signing a bunch of 1-year deals like they did last offseason.
yo #SBM guys I'm back! How u doin brothers and sisters?
haha good point! so I guess it's ... yay HarperCollins? ;)
Welcome to twitter! You should check out "The Tao of Twitter" first. You will learn so much, & life will be great! Keep at it!
Elton John's "Million Dollar Piano" is FABULOUS!! Go see it!
im the dumb one? Really? Haha
Most Rappers in Mainstream today aren't as half as good as the underground/hipster/Indie rappers...Something some ppl don't know about..
This is my 100th tweet. That is all.
this is never gonna work! These women are going to get us in trouble.
Greg Saugnier of Deerhoof just killed it with us! Amazing musician!
Catching up on #WWHL , I got that Fame reference!! right? Used to watch that show when I was little. :-)
YOU WILL HAVE FUN TIMES RT Reel Big Fish performing at BC tonight? Uh ok
Now I understand why JJ Hickson was put on waivers. Maloof Brothers don't want to spend money.
Why do I enjoy professional car washes so much?
Taking all my anger and disappointment out on my cousins...
grilld up like o.j.
:-) I like the things that you are thankful for. I like the card. Made me smile before going to bed. :-)
Could the Illini actually spend some weeks in the Top 25 after beating a ranked team? Despite a soft upcoming schedule, they'll screw it up.
The Germans tried to copy Coca-Cola and came up with the drink Fanta.
DwellStudio Organic Crib Set, Poppy Guide | Baby Bedding ...
went 2 this MAJOR model agency open call 2day, only to slaughter this girl I hate.
You have to wonder now that NC has passed their anti-gay amendment, how will biz and the Research Triangle attract and hire talent?
Yes I have heard it before. Just not very much. It's never meant to me before what it does now.
Starting my morning off right with a cup of coffee and
Happy birthday to my amazing sister ! (: I love you!
I like it fried crispy, no condiments, but with runny fried eggs.
Benefits of travel: I'm enjoying the totally unique sounds of country music on the radio here in Texas - on way to Austin for
I'm as real as it gets my friend
Have you spotted any Oktoberfest yet? Tell us where and help out your fellow #beer lovers!
Never tried that before
u fukkn heard me get her ready um bouts go2yo krib later
cause that's where the ratchets are at.
im havin a shitty week and if yall dont like it n sick of hearin me just stfu and delete me!! cuz to be honest i dont give shit
I'll have an international cook prepare my meals. I wouldn't want to take away from ur 1 shrimp from Saturday night.
ooh, points me in a direction? :)
A5. Horse piss. I just never drink it back home.
#IWannaMeet And ... All I Have To Do Is Pray And Dream BIG One Day It Will Come True B/C I Believe It Will =)!!
can I get a retweet from the best Nba player ever?
"experiences are priceless... embrace the feelings and live...." here we go!
can't wait to see you!
i'm good so happy school is over in a little less than 3 weeks
Cabeth, Thank you for the retweet ! I am going to write about airport museums in the future, will be in touch, Mark
Of course when I'm excited about something it always has to be ruined..
Had to #changemyFBname4college :-O
For those who don't know what Pho is...it's a Vietnamese noodle/soup and it is delicious
Crazy girl don't you know that I love you and I wouldn't dream of going nowhere. <3
At my fitting for PetSmart cursing my Australian mates.
PLEASE FOLLOOW ME I LOVE YOU ANSWER!!
I sometimes ask myself why? Guess I'll never know.
#Win 2 bottles of #Powerbrite, a biodegradable cleaner great on scum but easy on fine surfaces! Just follow us on twitter to win!
just cut out the invitations for 's birthday, this saturday at 7:00 pm
#FF The Food Dudes Edition:
Way to go Buffalo! Let the damn Pats take a QB that will be killing you for 10+ years
I would love to meet more professionals and network! Twitter has been my only avenue to do so! that's why I wish I could go.
“: Thanks to Aveda for hosting #mnbes - can't think of a better place to be for Earth Week!” Hear hear!
US business is $28 TRILLION in debt in stocks & bonds alone (not incl. bank financing). Since 2008, NV casinos owe more than take in.
Q: Why are we here? A: I want to amass such a tremendous fortune that the pile of it becomes a new island I can be buried in.
Oh, wait! Which is to say: what you said! Ha!
#Chiefs Rookie Camp Ethan Johnson and Dontari Poe were working one on one while Anthony Pleasant was going over technique and footwork.
FUCK YEAH, TODDLERS AND TIARAS!
#PaulRudd is the perfect combination of cute and funny. For true.
I would do anything to be at the
RT : "Merger of globalization & IT revolution is biggest thing happening today; we're hyper connected"--Tom Friedman
iTouch – Another reason why I love
I don't but why do you need it? Use AE. You can export to Flash. RT : do you have any flash tutorials?
I'm gonna get you back so bad!
She sure is! Happy Mother's Day.
Listen if you're going to guard 's James Harden with Steve Blake, this series is over in four.
Is debating beach options for October. Any recommendations?
: & I didnt haha :) omg I had playing while i was in "school" & Ms. Adkins said she liked the song that was playing
That looks awesome.
haha. Don't say old, just wiser.
when you embrace the rulings of the courts of the State against whom you are protesting as legitimate you have already lost.
PRODUCERS SUBMIT YOUR BEATS: ! RT!
Done that. Cleared cache. Going to try sudo maintenance next.
thanks for all your support you guys rock!
k lo k ma brotha..
cute. Bye.
It is really, really, freaking cold.
See you in CATlanta, Hoosiers. It's payback time.
(Please note: the reviewer in question is anonymous. So I have no idea who this lifelong 'friend' is.)
Spending the day with my sweeti
Finishing up the #StuPidasso site for #launch, then onto getting our theme song and working on the
believe it or not, I've watched that and its worth watching for bathroom baloney break down.
Can you plz give me a shoutout
Yeah, that's probably the best choice. I just want time to fast forward to 10:01am already
There is no pleasure in having nothing to do; the fun is in having lots to do and not doing it.
I heard! Let's catch up!
Give Thanks For Whaa Yuhh Are Now And Keep Fighting For What Yuhh Wanaa Be Tommrow
At tha studio listen to music from up an coming artist djdj he only like 14 Atlanta always has fresh young talent
The worst part is I understand #CrazyBill... He's not too many stepping stones ahead of me on the path to the rainbow toadstool.
Oh I miss Daria so much! My students used to tell me how much I sounded like her. Sorry that your eye is twitching though.
what r u watching? Ghost Adventures? (Zak's always good 4 a laugh, isn't he?) What promo were u in?
Didn't realize they did some work with dogfish head.
RT Cheryl Kravitz panel discussion w/ , , #RTMedia the first one was great. Enjoy!
love hearing that. Thanks Caroline!
Finally off work.... I'm bouta die to the work for the rest of the day!
#YallNeedToBreakUpIf yall only together for publicity.
Stuck in a catch 22 right now :/
Omg!!!!! It's #Wednesday and, I'm #loving #life:) Cereal Bowles
I haven't a clue! I'm just stunned it's gotten so bad. I tweeted that piece in part because I know the writer.
Good Morning young world *.*.
Dept about to award the Almont Lindsey Award for Excellence in History.
yo this is and i totally just hacked your twitter squids. im putting up the twitter badges on the band space. love you too
what happens on June 12th?
who was about to get beat up lol
#ThingsIFear Going broke
RTWho HASN'T Whitlock criticized? ... Whitlock's good. He's smart. But sometimes he writes about things he doesn't know well.
Tangradi only played 16 NHL games before this season...And he still only played 24 staggered games this season..
I hate when the villains in movies are hot. I can't focus on hating them, I just keeping wanting them. ;-)
Cereal at night>
I saw a hint of noir in your tweet, Allen. Write on!
heyy baby... just wanted to say iloveyou
At the Bikers For Christ Biker Weekend at Lincoln High football field. Come tomorrow and win a new Harley.
the awkward moment she your french and you use google translate to write a paper.
California Institute for Jobs, Economy and Education is presenting district maps to the Commission
Maybe apologetics is not a tract but a fairy tale or cycle of poems, a symphony.
Congrats & be prepared for the shock of seeing total interest that y'all will pay over life of mortgage, too
What a night at surrender... Make sure to come check us out tomorrow!! Only
My dad busted me and a girl once. Not only did he not care, he never told my mom because "she would never shut up about it."
love that movie!
It's so cute watching play football.
can you please #FOLLOWMECODY for ? it would make her day!54
Six minutes and I'm out this bitch. Working for a living is boring.
please follow me cause i will #NSN! and there will only ever be #Onetime when you follow me and today could be it x x1
hahaha i agree!
Thanks for the follow Eric!
Go out of your way to show appreciation today!
I thought you had an imaginary cat. Why is there a dog leash on the doorknob?
pittsburgh is trending....REPRESENT.
Has to write a 7pg. paper on an opposing argument & I picked animal experimentation but I cant put my opinion in...this is gonna be hard. =/
Some ppl just aren't meant to exsist in ur life
No phone, no computer, no TV... but I still have my Xbox. :)
LOOKING GOOD AT BROADWAY , NOT EVEN MIDNIGHT YET !!!! COME THRU AND GET YOUR PARTY ON !!!!
You let your employees talk on the phone and email, let them blog.
Moving OUT soon, shit gettin REAL (:
Where are you supporting ur #NYRANGERS tonight? Stop into &watch #Lundqvist dominate against the #SENATORS Come Bounce with us!
just finished crying to that movie too
thank you for making me think of a giant marshmallow man.
If you give me your e-mail address, I can have our circulation department mail you a copy of the Civil War issue.
To prolong and internalize "play" externally, ad infinitum.
how many times did you have to hit Bill Cosby over the head before he gave you that sweater?
Do I become a Grizzly's fan now that the Preds are out, or do I just go to sleep... z
lol if only!
yeah I guess.
we've determined that our new pup is part dingo. Throw in the current bear dog and we have the start of our own menagerie.
Hope everyone had a great Aldo Leopold Day!
I forgot just how badly summers fuck up my sleeping schedule from going to bed so late.
If the infection is brought under control your #bloodsugar level may reduce, enabling a reduction in the #medication that controls it
now I'm hungry.
Happy Hanukkah to all my fellow ja ja ja jew units! ENJOY!
Finally someone who [doesn't] speak english! - The avengers.. lol
But im back in this bitch, Reliving the moment.
I know the price of success: dedication, hard work and an unremitting devotion to the things you want to see happen
More Pareto Principle! But invariably, it's the 1% that reads 99% that then calls about the typos.
not true, signed with LA Dodgers last week
Happy Mother's Day!
Total carnage, with a hint of hope. But I'd lean more toward destruction.
I feel like crawling up in a corner like an Emo boy all of a sudden. . . :-\
meant to say voxer
Finnaly got on the car the bus was late and it didn't show up for 20 minutes after that we got on a handicaped bus
Third day in a row I haven't received a newspaper that shall remain nameless. Recording tells me to call back tomorrow.
Wish these people would #shutup so I can take a break!
Been doing that all along, as have my kids (living with son getting masters in divinity), many churches, and many friends/fam
Kossuth~ The unspoken word never does harm.
ok thanks anyway!
All you Lebron haters though he was gonna "disappear"..this quarter. lol
Patron wanted direction on the bus to Whole Foods market.
Baruch's Vera Haller has a good back-and-forth going between HS students about classic Time/Newsweek OJ covers.
flyers hartnell to see cardiologist. does he even have a heart???
Excited to be presenting today with , and at
PTSD for sure. re: western pysch
"He has more chins than a chinese phonebook" #ShitKBSays hahah
miss you too!
I QUIT! Oh yeah I can't as I am not independently wealthy.
So daydreams and nightmares is coming next month. It's going to be great music. Email info.ayoinmotion to have it sent to you.
lmao i seriously can't wait to see him on tour! i really want to meet him :)
you don't even know.
At Serbia Tourism event. Director acknowledged image is big hurdle they face in drawing more tourists.
The color is prettier in person just fyi lol it came out a little dark in the picture
LOL RT: Once again, Earth is undefeated in the Miss Universe pageant...It's like the other planets aren't even trying.
C'mon #BroncoNation! Let's make Von Miller a #TT!
Another problem with triple option is you teach your O-linemen to cut block, viciously, which is always on fringe of rules
Happy mothers day mommy(:
why don't we have our own show
I think I'm making it mine as well. America is kinda played...and cheap.
RT Salazar says critics who say permits lag in Gulf "don't know facts ... another ex. of falsehoods ... this political season"
Then where did all the money go that belonged to the investors? So glad you are covering the case. Fascinated.
Anger is the only thing to put off until tomorrow. ~Czech Proverb
Carnika Said she wanna get married someWhere Tropical that's wat were gonna do !
Let my love adorn you !
cleaning up my computer... throwing out all the programs i've never used
Same tweet keep repeating itself in my head smh
It's that or Hot Topic bondage pants with all the chains.
"Deep in my heart... I knooooo, bebe!" damn that song been in my head all morning. Love it dawling! Kem is a gem ;-)
I know nasty heauxs!
all bad ;0
press on nails lmao
Request "Gettin Em" on your local radio station Legooo!
I don’t know if this is a cold or allergies, cuz I’m allergic to Kleenex.
I'm in such a good mood right now!!
Within you I lose myself. Without you I find myself wanting to become lost again.
#Sanctuary tenants say some alarms didn't sound on their floor. Some people on balconies. No visible flames or smoke.
People MAD Cause The Lakers Garbage . . . . But Do YALL Play For The Lakers??? So What You Cryin For They Aint Payin Yall
Which hospital are you at? I'll totally bring you coffee
just finished, should be on the way soon
Hi all. I've spent the entire day putting together info for an art competition. One off the list.
Having issues with twitter. Won't let me find Mysti Roberts !
Additionally, to make your resume stick out use a heavier weight of paper when handing out copies at career fairs.
Anyone know who books Ace of Spades?
Who broke the stock market?? Thanks inept Congress....sealing a deal on the deadline date still proves you suck!!
My cat brought me an early Easter present ..... a mouse... still twitching..... so thoughtful.
Omg josh looks amazing
morgan freeman so eloquent and funny accepting the cecil b demille award #goldenglobes Brilliant man
A world with no hate is a perfect world<3
Behind every powerful man... Is a woman he wants to impress
I really hate myself sometimes, just a thought
Anyone else tired of the stupid Social Cam app on Facebook? Can't I just watch a video without installing the stupid app?
Lobster & shrimp with a suit on
What if it's slow and buggy?
trying to finish this outline so i can call Tara ...but that's not happening
Real integrity is doing the right thing, knowing that nobodys going to know whether you did it or not. - Oprah Winfrey
Livin alone, here in this place, I think of you and I'm not afraid.
Cut my hand open on my first illusion today. Thanks to my sister/sister manager who patched me up during a 3 second black-out b/t tricks.
congrats on the win!
Monday they suck then Tuesday they suck a bit more.
That's good u doing better.
My momma is knocked tf out !
i like the looks of that
And "On&On" is still knocking! Along with the rest of
Unfortunately we had to postpone Laughter is good for the heart. Sorry everyone!!
Congratulations! That's wonderful news!! No wonder you're happy :)
Alright get ya asses up for this game, BU vs BC Beanpot, bring it home boys
Those of us missing #ICSF we sure appreciate you who tweet. Keep up the good work and send pics when you can. Really helps feel like there
I bet Chris Mann has a hamster up his butthole right now.
Seventh inning stretch at beginning of 3rd presentation @
Westbrook way to quick for Blake
I have a SERIOUS sushi addiction. 🍣🍱
why not just go to a nude beach instead?
finally found that mix 😍
Emma had an audition this weekend at Cool little spot. And they tweet open casting!
unfortunately it won't be coming out any time soon. I can't wait for a fully functional office on my iPad.
Mi fa ancora male la caviglia :(
Hey, Scott Brooks, might want to think about pulling your starters really soon.
Oh, I can tell the difference! I read those sides on Showfax. ;) Hope you're doing well!
This stress will literally kill me in my sleep. Goodnight.
Some people just get all the luck. And I'm stuck with none.
I don't get we t v
#NeverShouldYouEver take advantage of someone when they're most vulnerable.
#ditto RT : Wait. What did Schefter say that ESPN feels compelled to apologize for? I'm already prepared to laugh.
my phone says 81?
yayayaya i got sum fah you woodie! I just hope u b in atlanta by den lol :)
Today dad is nonresponsive.
watchin the Lakers vs Heat Game!
if Ryan Clark doesn't want his tweets analyzed then he doesn't need to put it on Twitter!
I'm so tired! GOODNIGHT loves!!!❤✌💤🌙
Very kind of you to say, Michael. Many thanks.
trying more stuff out. Getting referral to ophthalmologist next.
thanks for the follow. Looking forward to seeing you at the #smbmsp event in a few weeks!
I'm pretty sure Jack never burned himself pouring tea. Just sayin'.
Need help #promotingyourwebsite? Come see what we have to offer.
address please “ I'm teaching a master class tom night 730pm at dance zone!!!! Come one come all!!!”
Grindin'? “: wanna bang in the daylight?! #bridgetowncomedyfestival”.
Today involved live music, mustaches, and sausage. (Which I couldn't eat. But which looked awfully good.)
You can be the captain, I can be your first mate!
third party recruiter
Yeah Yeah Yeah, haha. Once in 10 years.
good comeback, thanks for the twitter love. ;-)
I'm thinking about the B&N Nook Tablet. It is using the Android OS, so with some geek magic, you can get to the Android Market.
lol I meant email...
RT : I'm amazed that people aren't spontaneously combusting at MLA already.
Friend's blind date started with him on the phone. Then over dinner, he got on the phone for 10 min again at the table.
Do you want to help us with prepare taxes for those in our community? If so please let us know!!
Is your child ready to stay home alone? CPMG's Dr. Anna Mendenhall tells parents know if your child's ready on SD 6 SD Living, TODAY at 9am!
I love you.
Too many baby fathers, not enough husbands.
ignorant AND you failed to develop your mind? I can only excuse one of those...
My nursing professor sounds like a lesbian basketball coach. She just said "vag birth" and I almost died.
My mom listens to The EP more than I do. She even memorized Glad You Came & Chasing The Sun. The things you boys can do. :)
what's like larghoawerhitgpawrbe?
It's like I'm there!
thanks for saying hello. I still have my old chess club jacket!
You missed Cake, homey!
my screen broke and I can't see anything!:/
New McDonald's Chicken McBites are perfect for sharing, or not - we wont tell! Snack size now only $1.99!
Thanks for getting the word out!
i'm dying inside
the enemy might well have gotten a hold of good God gift & made it into something bad & ugly - rebuke the devil openly & live in love.
handle yo biz then. Beat her face in then stomp her
Good job shanks
just witnessed some ah-mazing girls singing "fancy" at karaoke at winners.
Floyd got dis
GIVE A HOMELESS PERSON a BOTTLE OF CLEAN WATER next time U SEE THEM....INSTEAD of LOOKING AT THEM FUNNY....YES
Thanks for following! Also, thanks for your work for our communities!
IM finally gonna do my the motto ive been wantin to do for months. i guess im doin it solo lol
Nah, it'll likely be fine. Somebody will sit him down and explain what's up.
Doop this, Philly.
LOL! I'm not much for destroying stuff, but ' tweet did tickle me.
Can't wait for the bout tomorrow at the Expo Center vs. , to the victor goes the spoils!
ha glad you enjoyed class!
Thxs So Much 4 Reminding Me Ill Post It Later In Your Fb Page Rite... Give Me The Link Plsz
"You get me in room of high class people.....and then ya act real rude to me..."
Oh You know we always want to see our Burnicus! ;-)
You are the best Mom ever. Me, not so much.
WHY ISNT CAITLIN POSTING ABOUT HOW SHE GOT A REALLY GOOD SEAT TO THE KANSAS CITY SHOW ON HERE!?! heheh :D She got tickets <3 WOOP WOOP! :D
happy birthday bro!!!! Have fun down there!
HARRY!!!! Don't be mean ;)........ Lol but Savan and donkey look similar!!!!
I want a lollipop :)
oh wow lmao
“: Your body is my playground....” Im ready for recess!
Waiting in line at gamestop with
We can't wait to go out to the Long Island #Wineries this summer! Always a fun weekend activity.
I got the same love for old school r&b that i have for old school hip hop
Hoping Belichick changes this... RT : reports coming that will sign with
I like that!
": Random: love y'alls music! Will we be seeing more in Feb?" Sprinkle of Greatness is coming!
Break a leg! This weekend The Vault Ensemble kicks down the door of economics and punches vampires in their sparkly faces with...
Got ridiculously excited when I remember The Bachelorette starts tonight.
Wearing my STUNNA SHADES
I don't think I could make it as an artist. My mind is about to explode just choosing a color scheme for my bike build.
good luck to everyone buying tickets soon. xx -breezy
RT : RT : Due to #Colts win, free breakfast at INDY area Denny's with purchase of a beverage 6-10am
Dodged puppies, ponies, and parents pushing strollers on my run this afternoon. Human obstacle course!
you bet - is representing ;)
Hi sweetie :-) please don't forget bout me :-) I want to be in your awesome film :-)
Nothing makes that acceptable. No matter how much think they are above the law. And I'm usually pretty OK with law enforcers
Carl's Jr. coffee isn't really that bad.
Congrats! That is fantastic!
What? LOLOL SOME crayfish account followed us:$
i cant believe they did that...... they are the same people who live by the "I can have this but you cant" rule
Why is it so spicy!!! I hate it!!!
just vote for her :D
yes they should!
“: Though the way it happened was noble, locking myself out of my house still makes me feel like an idiot." - time for a quick 9?
Was visiting a forum I hadn't been to in years. I'm amazed at how much misinformation there is about what affiliate marketing is and isn't.
With the Warm Weather coming this weekend, check out our spacious Guest Rooms and refreshing Olympic Size pool. A home away from home.
entire families will be camping in his hair.
The #Spalding baseball team won 3 games and is the World Series champion.” located in Louisville ky
The Last Song is #oneofmyfavoritemovies! ♥
loo. I was all like :O :O when you said it tho. But I kind of screamed too...
I love #ModernFamily. Such a well-written show.
RT : Your relationship with GOD is more important than any thing because you know for sure thats a relationship that will last
I wish I had your room -__-
Left my iPad charging overnight ;_;
"If fear is cultivated it will become stronger, if faith is cultivated it will achieve mastery."
What do you think?
Finally some patience at the plate. Well done Rickie!
That's redundant - you said United States twice.
And, now my kitchen sink is leaking all over the floor.
Power out in most libraries on Seattle campus, inc servers hosting our websites and services. No ETA yet.
Yep for a minute RT : you downtown by the Studio?
RT : Victory Yakima Glory and Coronado Dumb Blonde just tapped for a delightful Sunday session..
meth is a hell of a drug
Baking brownies
Yeah....I hope you meant a strong 7-8...UK already has a strong 5...
So is Pepsi Next Pepsi's answer to Coke Zero?
My mom is the realest, sometimes confined, overdramatic, unreasonable, exaggerating, annoying & unsensable but always real Happy Mothers Day
Will So b WatchiN #KeepinUpWithTheKardashians Tonight!!!! If YoU WiLL b Too, RT!!! <3
Though I do have to start real day job work after lunch. Every cloud has some kind of lining, silver or otherwise, I guess.
Hahaha! Philosophical gangsters.
RT #SmartPundit2012 kicks off NEXT WEEK! Who do you turn to for the best coverage? Get ready to nominate your faves
My body is asleep, but my mind is awake.,
Twitter diet stop, no more coffee. Have a good day everyone.
The photos of the hotel planned near Maricopa Point are scary! Glad the #GrandCanyon dodged that debacle!
not much wbu? :)
Central Asia quake killed 13. Somalia famine killing tens of thousands. World crisis will continue as society grows in complication; getRedE
4:16 and my ass still up
Come on Cuse, gotta stay on them!
So thankful for all of the love and support from all of my family and friends. You guys rock and I love you all. BIG GROUP HUG!!!
Swish! Swish! Poof! You are hereby annointed honorary Mermaids and Mermen!
starting by me D:
I. I.. I. Speechless.
wow.. awesome, I love Beverly Hills! :D
Haha RT : Members of #teamfollowback....what's your aim in life?
OFF TWEETS Peaches'+Apples'=<3
STOP LYING TO ME
thanks, I'll check it out
Happy Birthday!
Next meeting of Potomac Yard Metrorail Implementation Work Group, Wednesday, May 16, 6:30 pm. #AlexandriaVA City Hall.
i see a menstrual cup in there
Sorry to see you go. Set up shop in CT and take a run at it?
had fun at the Brantley Gilbert and Eric Church concert tonight!
Humility and hard work will take you far.
lol I just saw this tweet! I was at work. I still have it installed just haven't paid the bill. World of Warcraft = $$$.
no problem......night
Reports that Occupy DC is being evicted, solidarity and hope for the 99%! Don't give up!
RT : RT : I totally concur. I would give up donuts for Lent but not John Hamm.
his knee got jacked up!! It looked like his knee cap collapsed...the was a hole where it should've been
Amazing jazz at Dimitriou's Jazz Alley... Arturo Sansoval.
Like Pac did say he follows God's laws--what specific laws? No doubt the reporter put in Lev quote but what law is Pac referencing?
Do you ever think about what the dogs would be if they were a superhero? These are the questions my dad asks (:
rules2live by~be kind,gracious, patient,slow2condemn&quick2forgive,be of strong faith,believe in yourself,&always give more than you take♥
I doo! Hahh sometimes.. mostly though I don't give any fucks <3
just did aerobics for 1 hour and burned 1118 calories. Total burned so far: 3200 calories! on 5/16/12 at 8:55 PM
Chilling after school today
Using one of my favorite southern tornado terms, "hunker down"
Jon Daly in the hunt at the end of Round 1, Rory Mcllroy takes early lead..#PGA Open Championship
6 of my Elite 8 still alive... in the one season I limited myself to one just-for-show bracket.
Owe let me see wat I got n science
Looking forward to meeting you & learning about #THATCAMP on Fri. And I'll put in a plug for the North Shore for house hunting!
Late HUB nights like these are why I keep a hoodie in my desk :)
Thanks, Sam!
We do believe that you've made the right call today :)
awesome email me whenever :0)
As you do.
Titus Maccius Plautus~ I am always afraid of your something shall be done.
Follow and be sure to tell them sent ya!
no lol. It's smoke like a junkie, fuck like a nympho
I don't want to be followed by SPITTERS (SPAM TWITTERS)
that aint no lie, google docs, and there new drop box or deal... I feel dumb using this but time to learn..
@ gottino Restaurant NYC a glass of wine before going to work!
Wikipedia, Google, Watson: To gather, To access, To analyze / Duderstadt at
Favorite original nintendo game?
Switching the page from bail bondsman to landlord. Gotta give 3 day notice cause people think rent free. I'm evicting them after 3rd day.
Something about April fools lol ok. I'll just go back to watching Desperate Housewives. it was a joke babe:)
I take that last tweet back, at least Louisville got a moral victory from a true freshmen
@ gertrude, it was flashing wit
Thanks, dad, for your faithful example of the Gospel. I know who God is because you have shown me.
I love him so much, like you have no idea<21
hahha I heard it did that! That's ridic!
Ever listen to Avril Lavigne's "Sk8er Boi" the progression of the whole song is kinda nuts..
“: “: i would like my clothes por favor... #answermytexts #byehoe” and Chad's swimsuit😏” Please😁
do you know what time will the DLC be available for eastern time Tuesday?
For the month of September, everything I buy will be bought off of Ebay. What are some common household items you buy off of Ebay?
don't start no shit br0!!!!!
Don't cry because it's over. Smile because it happened. - Dr. Seuss
He Never Said It Wasn't True
you had me at hello
My SOC duties today include labeling report cards and shredding stuff
This hoe Tammy is childish af!!!
My professor just posted: "All outstanding work must be submitted by May, 13, 2014." So...I get two more years to finish this exam? AWESOME.
You mean from a 'save a good example, raze the rest' POV? Maybe. That was the logic that doomed the Stock Exchange.
#occupypdx RT : Unitarian Church has been of great help to occupiers
Lunch and Dinner Deal: Buy a Half Pound of Ribs and get Chips and a Drink for FREE! Nothing is better than FREE! We're open till midnight.
Thanks cuz! You are too ;-)
Investors approve new board at scandal-hit Olympus
? Clickable in iPhone app... Not in echofon?
"Enter the 36 Chambers". This album brought me into rap and introduced a life long love of the Wu Tang Clan....
hah. some people REALLY dont understand.
The reason why she ("Gabby" Sidibe) says she does movies - just made me feel sad for her and that perhaps she doesn't get it.
THERE YA GO
Using SPDY on Your Web Server - ReadWriteWeb
Wish you could have made it. Side note: I stopped by H&M a couple weeks ago - had a great chat with Byron. What a great place.
Winding down the year. What was your most significant #interpreting encounter this year? Would love hear.
Did you know that the idea for Earth Day was hatched in an office bld at 2000 P Street, NW leading up to the first ED in 1970?
I hate remembering things I want to forget.
Mornin' sat through presentation on interpretation of bog bodies by Eammon Kelly last night - I miss Ireland & civilization!
Impress.js integrated with
I can't wait to graduate and leave.
Thanks for the RT - handsome kitty on your profile too!
thanks Lance!!!
I'm Probably Not gonna sleep eating chocolate this Late :] Hehe "DONT TELL MY MOM!"
Fauja Singh, 101 yrs. old, running the marathon; you are the man. Now that's cool, so very cool.
THEY DON'T KNOW ABOUT ME AND YOU ~
Alabama state motto: At least we're not Mississippi.
Glen Greenwald YUCK #maddow U went from one segment w/ assholes to interviewing an asshole.
House Education Committee hearing SB 576 on charter schools. and also testified in support.
#tnla12 Information is a means to an end. People care about getting a job, not finding resume books. Link to the situation of the person.
Cleaning cleaning... I hate cleaning. Need ;)
Everyone should have a relationship with a holistic veterinarian.Having a balance between Eastern and Western medicine can save a pet's life
So youre telling me I need to return the bucket and magnets I just bought? Damn!
Welcome! Have a great day!
"If you're running away then I'm looking for you - And if you've lost your way I'm seeing you through." ::deer tick::twenty miles::
Never change for anyone but yourself. You should never live anyone else's dreams but your own. Make them come to fruition.
I give good advice all the time!
Does anyone watch #idol any more?
This wasp is intent on terrorizing me.
If you scratch your back you need to scratch mine:3
From Editor of CARVE: one of the best things an online lit mag can do: winnow down amount of content posted at a time
At the 19th best bar in the world, apparently...
send it to me I couldn't download the 5 free beats my damn EVO phone is trippin smh i wanna hear them
"Beans are the future!"
You should respond with a rousing bout of exercise w/accompanying loud music at 11am. Perhaps a little marching in place?
Love when the whole family is home
May the Fourth be with you
"Just when u think it can't get any worse, it can. & just when u think it can't get any better, it can. ;)"
RT Obama's in LA to promote his "Forward" campaign slogan, which is ironic since he'll be the only one moving forward in traffic.
thanks for the mention!
The Doors!
<=== now following
Houston We are expanding our network of sponsors! Get in contact with us!
No. I actually shot him. I don't wanna go to jail, sheesh!!! :-P
Good luck to senior James Kornfireld at his tryout with the , Senior will be held out of the tryout with an injury.
good lord. See u later.
RT Just heard my first "Trayvon Martin-George Zimmerman" reference in a song. Usher ft Rick Ross - Lemme See... *shrugs*
Happy Independence Day TMC!!!
21 Jump Street...please go see it. I respect Channing Tatum so much more now.
#supercommittee #superfails 4 days before black friday - cancel christmas everybody!
Make sure you are registered to vote by 5pm Tuesday May 9 for New Mexico
Excited For New Jonas Album 6
Just need to know what that Pussy like. So one time is fine wit me!!
me miss you too my oh so phony bf
Thanks for the Snap love, Anna! --Glynn
what do you do when someones having a seizure in the bath tub?.......throw in a load of laundry.
will you marry me ?
How was your da today?
In Buddhist tradition, sandalwood scent is believed to transform one's desires and maintain a person's alertness while in meditation.
Weird....don't know why I'm so lethargic today. I should keep busy, but I think I going to sleep first. > - < z
"If you want to know who God is, look at Jesus. If you want to know what it means to be human, look at Jesus." -N.T Wright
ATL folks, come to the BC Alumni Association's Third Thurday Happy Hour
YES I wanna rewatch that! :3 I'm watching fairy tail right now and I hate myself LOLOLOLOLOL
Or heard of "If you have to ask what jazz is, you'll never know." ~Louis Armstrong
The faded life nigggggeeee
#First20SongsOnShuffle #17 Breakn' A Sweat by and The Doors ( Remix)
i got called by someone in nebraska lol
Imagine covering a b-ball game, only showing your team's best plays, and opponent's mistakes. Welcome to Political Coverage on cable news.
Fun Fact about the word Tornado - "Tornado" was a 14th-century sailor's word for a violent, windy thunderstorm.
r u there to learn?
Me and #oomf met on MySpace O__O
Happy 93rd birthday to wise Nelson Mandela. "Resentment is like drinking poison and expecting it to kill your enemy." - Nelson Mandela
Buick Verano commercial is on my nerves. Baylor and Colorado is intense.
We needa find a different time to do this cuz I never have time to kill Ed
Thanks gents. It was brief and passing, but certainly out of nowhere. (or so it felt)
W/ Burger King sponsoring USA Basketball (& McDonalds being Olympic sponsor): r there other non-Oly sponsors partnering w other gov bodies?
Happy Birthday to my big bro !!!!
I think it was Corydon.
I wna leave. I realized y I havent...
"4 we have heard of ur faith in Christ Jesus(the leaning of ur entire human personality on Him)absolute trust & confidence in Him/Col 1:4"
hey, lets go get dinner sometime soon - been awhile.
Never lend a geologist money. They consider a million years ago very recent.
okay.. maybe next week? Just let me know...
#GREG never will forget you
Did you know that Billy Corgan owns his own wrestling company?
I'm watching the most random movies tonight. Mission Impossible followed by 17 Again.
Hate when ppl post a picture every 5 minutes instagram .. don't nobody care & your ugly af lol
VISD to consider dance/drill team uniform contract bids at meet.
And I wasn't even trying for punny... Just playing off of your "thepeche" which happens to be taken. Have a great weekend!
Middlesex and it's free :) xx
Anywayz, I'm done 4 real!! I forgot I shouldn't be discussing real shhh on twitter!!
Shut up, Dakota Fanning
-- And just like that... the Yankee Captain now has 3,100 hits!
I took my mommy to T.G.I. Fridays lastnight!!
Yes please stop yo how old is princeton is he 16
Ces Convention in Las Vegas Jan 2011 Offering discounted group rates or individual rooms Rates Book now www.myvegaspeople.com
friends are the family you choose for yourself
free lil Ivan & Cripple
I wish could compete in the Baltimore Grand Prix if I had enough funding #totalletdownfor2011#
I have been taking in about 1000 cal per day and doing too many sit ups...
Big Is In.....BE PROUD OF WHO U ARE
filming today! Its nasty outside so why notn
More more hours of the day w 's new extended hours on Friday & Saturday with the bar staying open until 2AM!
#pot #nokettle RT : Ryan: "we all know Pres. Obama can't run on his record."
YAY I feel loved :')
Should I let him take me to Puerto Rico...?
Lmaoooo!! I haven't promised ANYTHING!!! And WAIT!! YOU was tryna get me to smash one of your friends!
My dad told me to start outlining on what i want for a tattoo <3 yeuss
Thank you for those kind words. I visited your website and your talent shines thru. Your photo of the month was incredible.
Today's recovery from yesterday's insane gym-venture: Plenty of water, yoga, chocolate cake. (What? I earned my treat.)
Nothin like sprinting after a bus on a Tuesday morning
where we staying :)
no there not it saying on facebook a list of like place to stay in anaheim california
"Of all there is to know, the most important thing, is to know that we know nothing at all!"— DJohnson T&B ComingSoon!
Amen! Libraries, by and large, don't have the expertise to solely fund/run publishing venues, but I think we can help.
the kings are playing like they have been playing drinking games...badly
That's messed up!
id be happy to, as soon as I learn how to do it lol.
Damn dude… that is old school.
hey what's up? Justin
we got another 3 hours in on the mural today, photos coming soon! :)
What do you get when you cross an idiot with a watch? A cuckoo clock.
Im tired , half asleep and have to take a 4 hour AP English Language test. -.- 😒
Please let me know if you are going to HP DISCOVER in June.
Environmentally speaking, what are the 7 most harmful consumer activities? Any guesses?
Some people will accept the Truth
were in panda. & Rosy, Mike & Ronn are makin a big deal bout it. if we don't go today we won't be allowed in their property
W/out the streamers ppl wouldn't know the truth thx!
It really sucks to be scared to text the person you like because you think you'll only be annoying them
kidding...right?
Its over by the Stacked Pickle on Old Meridian. I wont be back in time from out of town :(
you stand on Dr king's shoulder? While depressing others civil rights! Some still fighting! Medical marijuana rights
How was everyone's Vday????
joins, or just renew your membership.
don't be jealous cause you aren't here for my mini shrimp boil ;)
will do!
Police say Samantha Koenig first person in Anchorage to be abducted by stranger since Joshua Wade kidnapped Mindy Schloss in 2007
i have been super busy lately not much on line time
A massage would be good right about now
Stannier: Its not just tollbooth workers and cashiers, automation will also put researchers out of a job
“: oop! lol...too bad i cant see these emojis, missing the whole thing #womp” 😂😂😂👎
So exciting.. Welcome + Congratulations!
I'm pretty sure Sabotage by the Beastie Boys is the greatest music video of all time.
Great suggestion! Thanks. How about The Blessed Damozel by Dante Gabriel Rossetti?
Proverbs 18:21 Life and death are in the power of the tounge , those who love it , will eat its fruit ,
To be honest it was a bad idea. Lost alot of fans. Rap shouldnt be for kids anyways.
finally did a pedicure, pretty toes are back!
if u get the wiki working lmk, sounds interesting
We got to try your brownies at Lucy's in Hood River, they are indeed Blissful!
Sitting in the same room with Johnny Depp and Tim Burton yesterday was a trip.
you look beautiful! Congrats on your wins.
Lying in bed this morning in London with no particular desire to get up anytime soon.
Happy Birthday! Why should we confine birthday greetings to Facebook?!
sucked but there guys get paid too, cp was due 4 a clunker & doesn't seem 2 do well in non save situations
I hate when i'm about to retweet someone but then I realize their tweets are locked.
I love it when wears his "Somerville Rocks" t-shirt :)
Don't I know it! Would be interested in sharing thoughts sometime if you are. My contact info is at www.notmessenger.com
i wanna show love 2 my gf she's been workin so hard these past few weeks-Although we talk less i understand && am So Proud of U
... Next time you start, I will be like, "WAIT NO REMEMBER THAT TIME..."
i followed for you :))
Car sex in the rain wiff my Taylor at 230 in the morning? #YesPlease ;) <3 #Nom! <3 P.L.U.R.<3
Hey guys! Whats up?
Longest fucking walk ever
thanks for the reply.
We are the curators of our own consciousness.
Crap. I meant if #Buckeyes loose. Lol RT if #BEARCATS loose you have to do a show next week with
absolutely!! I'll email you soon!! :)
Life may SUCK like HELL!!!! But, I suppose you can't have a rainbow.......without a little rain.
Scottsville Farmers Market is open today til 12:30 PM.Find us at Scottsville Pavilion: 125 Fleet Street for your GPS!
but drew gets sexy time...you don't
And I totally understand if you don't have time for me but try & make my wish come true!<3
I want to sleep.
Since the season is over, it's time to start dating again. #singleduringseason #dedication?
Since Chamomile is made from flowers, not the tea plant, it is considered an herbal infusion. We love it no matter what you call it!
This Saturday meet NYT Best Seller, YA author, Gayle Forman Community Center 10 am.
What I miss?
I know babe, I know ;)
I just realized the wall calendar at my office is still on January...
Thanks for the S/O!
And you go coach Bieste!
one day at a time bro :-)
are u mane in this year ?
yupp. I gave you $10. Well, I gave it to then he gave it to you
#ThingsThatAnnoyMe when people don't acknowledge you until they want something, Then they go back to ignoring you.
hey you:p so im bored and layin in bed and thought id say heyy & whatsup?:p javent talked to u inna while
Some ppl take hella pics but still haven't mastered the technique of smiling with they grown ass,looking like a stroke victim
i regret deleting my myspace.... i bet it would be hilarious to go back and see how i was haha
Absolutely! Just give us a call at:858.490.3930 and we can set something up for you
Thanks for following, Jordan!
I'm the one bumpin' the Beasties near Whittier Park, y'alls.
where/how can I find more info about Item#26 DOB regarding Chelsea Hotel that passed last night?
I do enough already, beliveee me...
WHOS GOING TO THE MALL?!
Feel better babe
note to self: trying to get anything done after waking up from a NyQuil sleep is damn near impossible. worse than a hangover, just horrible
Yum indeed!
I hope we draft an OT tomorrow. Or Saturday.
Get a new "do"this spring. Why not? Try some highlights.. Go for it!
Battle of the flavors: Oreo vs. Raspberry Chocolate Chip... ready, set, choose!
good Morning to all my followers!! New week to get it in...
He's still a Democrat, right? Then, I doubt I'd agree with your book report.
work it out! I'm writing my way to a better position.
We're all waiting for you to eat crow, Skip Bayless.
After and Carrie will be the award for Best New Artist... My heart is with
and breathe deep!
was your account hacked again?! ; )
Today's students are increasingly nomadic learners.
also on the #entrepreneurship panel with is and melissa honohan, founder of momentum strategies.
You've found out, i've got a crush on you. Ah yea 👌
Love is a beautiful and precious feeling. Dont make no mistake about it...
#Sing just in case he Answers I'll murder babyboy CaseyAnthoney #It'sAStateOfEmergency
For every beauty there is an eye somewhere to see it.
yeah I'll hit you up closer to summer time
"My imagination makes me human & makes me a fool; it gives me all the world & exiles me from it." -- Ursula K. LeGuin via
- Rather, quite a few have shown a proclivity to put up poor-to-modest numbers when working with a HOF QB.
Can't stand the suspense of waiting for to appear in Apple App Store. Microsoft Courier for the iPad, godspeed.
We're looking for a speaker and a venue for this month's event. Interested in either (or both!)? Let us know: contact at refresh-dc dot org
the fact that you have researched this and its possible has made my day. I need some helium and ballons then i could try it
The #HondaClassic has to be pleased with the names in their top 10: McIlroy, Woods, Westwood, Rose, Schwartzel, Bradley, McDowell, & Fowler
We are excited for our yogis starting Level 2 our teacher training today. To our future teachers bringing yoga on & off the mat.
Shut Up
It cant go down like this .
thanks so much for the kind words! A big THANK YOU from Tad & Dan!
I'm a senior. I graduate in May.
Everyone go follow !(:
lol I bet you just said it and chuckled about it ha
That's because we love you! Must say, your flowers are a beautiful shade of purple.
Thank you for messaging Have you seen our website & list of top 10 albums of 2010? Hahaha jk Sry for auto dm.
no problem! love your content...keep up the great work!
Let's Have A Full House Of Leather!
black friday shopping done. happy to be home got lots of great deals and even got a new Bikini.
hi Will follow all my friends
Speed Dating event for singles 30's and 40's
I'm so tired. I feel like it's hard to enjoy life when it's so busy. Need to slow down just a bit.
I freaking miss you. I feel like I haven't seen you in forever. & it feels extra long b/c I've been weedless ):
But most importantly #HappyMothersDay to my Madre without you Id be nothing. I love you.
does butter really have 200 calories per tablespoon?! I LOVE real butter, but I wasted half a day of calories on breakfast...
Thanks. I think that's what we'll be doing for now, too (until we start imaging and/or decide about preservation formats).
Indeed it was!
Had beautiful relaxing morning with my guys. No where to rush off to for a change. Heavenly!
A Closed Mouth Dont Get Fed & Closed Legs Dont Get Head
“ Monday Buy 1 Get 1 Free Bottles of Wine up to $90.”
Diplomacy is the delicate art of getting two people to see the world through the others eyes if only for a moment. Its harder than it looks.
my bad:) i did
Dr. Klineberg says more people want to live in the city than the suburbs. Only 1/3 of Americans have a child at home.
- That's indeed the $64,000 question (though its gotta be higher by now with inflation). So much is out of the gate already...
i love You kelli.!!
Nonsense! Don't listen to those kids. 30 is far better.
I'm taking my dad to see #TheAvengers today. Should we see it in 3D or 2D? I've been disappointed with action films in 3D so far.
Julia Washburn: NPS must be "audience advocates" and "create programming with our audiences, not for our audiences"
why did she say bye forever now!?
I love that my girls have bilingual friends. Also cute: when parents call their cell phones & I hear 1/2 conversations I can't understand.
RT : RT : Money is part math, part emotion.
Ant hill
Popeyes on St.Nicholas...Such a decent Sunday Uptown.
“Live by intuition and consciousness.” from Yogi Tea
RT : Small Business Saturday is this weekend! November 26. You know what to do.
RT : A successful person is one who builds a strong foundation with bricks that others have thrown at them.
Wish everything and everyone were still the same but shit i guess we gotta grow up some time.
This is so messed up . I just made a twitter so I can talk to the boyz now they're gonna delete them. Are u fucking kidding me
I might have to disagree..Crispin Glover has more sharp angles...
Oh lol it's an iPhone 4s :)
Who is going to be at this Saturday with and ? WE ARE!!! Stop by the K-LOVE tent and say hi!!
will be in prymont? In October ish. Know of some cool food spots?
So basically, Brett is the only Yankee who doesn't feel the need to try to hit an hr every at bat? It's called small ball, boys.
Nope. Exec Meeting. Next lunch for me is May 7, 10 or 11.
oh ok. Well i'm trying to drive up there if you just want to ride back..
Not going to listen....ok wtf am I still standing here for
how is lil mama and little Romo doing??
That was so embarrassing
why grow a 'strictly ornamental' pineapple? my mom & i were 1st elated, then disappointed, finally puzzled seeing one @ garden ctr this wkd.
needs to be more of us ;-)
Its cool. I'll totally move. Though I don't understand most British humor so I might be screwed.
thanks nick. i felt the spirit just run away with the negativity. let's be positive!
At a party I hear "holy diver." once again reminded of
U got niggaz datz around u!.. Dey gone try dey best 2 dwn u!.. Keep dem squarez up outcha circle!.. Wat don't kill u will hurt u!..
Getting Rod opening day tix
#How2MakeABlackPersonMad by trying to act like us.
Talked to the new Bucks rep today. She seems alright - since you left town on us. Haha
RT : "Well I'd say my weaknesses are I work too hard & also I murdered all those teen runaways." -near-miss job interview answer
It is! Fog is one of those weather things that is just bizarre.
Good Morning Milwaukee.. Start with a 20 minute walk/run, a piece of dark chocolate and an orange to start your power day!!
no wonder you looked familiar ! I enjoy your music by the way and your hugs :) ! xoxo
Ready for my time.
Good Morning World!!!!
When I stood up in BIOLOGY and everybody stared at me and I tossed my test into the trash! Thank you for the inspiration.
Was #Parenthood EVER nominated for a Golden Globe? I am obsessed. This can't be.
"Goodnight Nathan" - Harold Finch
Our students are making things happn!! It is just so exciting to see!!
Happy Mothers Day ICONic Momz without you guys the boyz wouldn't be here !! ♥
studying is goingto be the death of me this semester :(
Thanks Peter, I really appreciate it. Congrats are in order for you as well, Mr. Armchair Analyst! Good things!
Go have your party somewhere else if you don't like this one >:)
#68 Airplanes to Anthropology | 101 Things To Do
Don't mean to sound corny, but DONT stop believing... There IS a God!
Seattle can be a really beautiful place sometimes.
For experiential learning projects: start small, and have very clear, discrete milestones and checkpoints along way.
You and I both know this is not a simple win/lose situation. To present it any other way is offensive.
If Twitter and Tumblr were school subjects, my parents would be so proud of me.
Congrats to Lt. Col. Tammy Duckworth for #ywca2012 woman of distinction military/veterans affairs award.
Crawford with 29 saves. Smith with 33 saves. Bickell leading in penalty minutes. Keith TOI leader.
Be a social trainer: encourage learners to ask questions on blogs, wikis, or by video - and recommend they contact you via
"You look like 10 miles of bad road" Charlotte King lmfao
A very heartfelt thank you to Debbie welcomed me into her campaign and made me feel at home.
Since you're now with KSR, are you not going to do HG anymore?
Check us out this Saturday in West Bend, WI @ River Horse West. NO COVER!!!!! Show starts at 9:30 pm. Come be entertained.
Are you guys still accepting audition tapes? : What else do you want? via THE CANYONS written by BRET EASTON ELLIS
well, I have to walk in the rain so it's not too fun
RT : Even the best theme EVAR becomes cliche when you see it in a hundred panel titles :)
we think so! Stars and stripes everywhere!
Currently in studio with the homie -- #iSupportMyCityV4 -- get with it!!
I know you are on here I can see you in the other room hahaha!
Me: yea computer take that! Your getting shut down! How do ya feel about that? Rachel: Cassie your computer doesn't have feelings. Hahaha
#dailyfeedback - Songs for the Pirates' Opening Day - Sister Sledge/Todd Snider/Steve Wynn & The Minus 5
Time to come see us in the GYM!!
omg so much precalc right now not even funny...
but you dont miss me.
Minnesota Golden Gophers ‘Hockey Gopher ’ Pendant – Gold Plated Jewelry
Every form of addiction is bad, no matter whether the narcotic be alcohol or morphine or idealism.
Thanks for the follow! Have a great weekend!
Really want to see Captain 'Murrica today…
thank for the RT!
<3 you. Sorry I haven't been on Facebook much
Looking at all these prom pictures get me all excited for next years prom !
nope, I like LONG acrylics and my stylist is a miracle worker!
what do you think of amendment one?
can you follow me once I follow them??:)
A writer should write with his eyes and a painter paint with his ears. ~Gertrude Stein
: Wow u r so beautiful! Gnite sweetheart!
#Devils score they lead 2-1
RT : Hey everyone.I have THREE codes for Choco Gets A Check Up, a photo book about a very cute bunny who is a bit......
#rejectedluckycharmsmarshmallowshapes: the phallus
left cheek right cheek left cheek right cheek(:
A taste of Kelowna: This city is waking up from its repute as a family summer vacation to a year-round destination that offers great ...
Thank you so much for following! Happy Friday!
was perfection in The Manuel Ortiz Show
Is it Friday yet? I am so ready for the weekend and am happy that we're almost there. So much to do and so little time.
so, who gonna be my 130th follower?? the spot is yours... :D
DY Prep College Prep Day was a huge success. Thanks everyone for attending!
...and you will be tempted by the dark side. You underestimate the dark side - yadda yadda
Stopped in to try one of those new juices they're carrying. $6!? For a bottle of juice?!
and as a final act of vengeance/justice, she touches Lex' face, transmitting some chemical into his system which causes total amnesia of...
Congrats to the #Preds. They look like they can play with anybody right now. Surprised that the #Wings are 1st team eliminated
i can't wait to see u win against JDS and win back the belt hun
Awe that's so sweet. ^_^
Open wounded, empty handed. If you love someone, tell them right now.
Okay, who jammed a red-hot poker in my left hip while I was asleep?
Brad Ziegler, Todd Heap, Braylon Edwards (?), Paul Goldschmidt ~ it's a great day to be a #Zonie!
Me: "Trey I just need to clone you so I know a far away store will do good." Trey "well thats not very Christian." HAHAHA
Catching up on the news on I am really starting to think they are better than the BBC. You can stream them online.
Now, how much have you spent? RT : I just won $515 on scratch offs! Yippee! #FIREnDICE! cc: ah!
Happy Birthday! I hope they got you a cake with candles while you are in jail!
#itsawkwardwhen a girl tells you how upset she is that the love of her life boyfriend of a week broke up with her and you laugh by mistake
I'm excited to be heading to the release party for 's #wuftoom today!
#supportlocalmusic Live random tracks. Requests welcome. Stop by. You know where.
yea bright and early in the meowning at the meowting, about our meowsconduct
shhhhhhhhhhh, I'm trying to kill them with kindness.
can no longer think. Brain is officially shutting off for the night :-)
More golden Friends of Globe shirts printed and ready to wear! ~To MICA friends who are waiting to get yours, lets meet up!
Fuck these pussies. So called champs, straight up chumps!
Should parents get arrested for their children getting or letting them get a tattoo?
Really enjoying Washington Ballet's Rock & Roll. At Harman Hall through this weekend.
trust me, it does.
I shouldn't be laughing so hard.
inevitably: "some people somewhere have different opinions than mine own, and that angers me."
I LMFAO at people who type LMFAO and/or listen to LMFAO.
There's a giant spider in my bathroom and I'm about to cry omg
i hate writing citations..
should go for #phil! Bring home some championships baby!!
Girl you look good won't you back that thing up
better now than with Obamacare ;)
#3WordsOfAdvice Live.laugh. love
Just took the bus. Alone. For the first time. are you proud? Bring on
anytime girlie. Hope you're well. We'll chat soon.
On second thought those shits are ugly. Nevermind.
The old saying is TRUE birds of a feather flock together
Looking for strategic partners in developing an automated health coach using interactive video
what about analysis?
RT : We're going to give it all we got for the last 30 mins of the week. Come join us on KPTV at 10:58p.
" Georgia?!?! I put Tennessee to the east of Montana" ..... Hahaha uh......
"But when he smiles, his face has a gentle, boyish charm which makes women want to mother him."- MOURNING BECOMES ELECTRA (1931)
#Elwayed So Tebow chose to be backup/wildcat QB over a realistic chance to start in his home town? Something seems off here
goddam cant stop thinking about the Revolutionary War. I am a tortured soul. bicentennial got me for good back in '76.
That is a great suggestion! Do you think tan background with black font is better?
Go to Salon Boutique 11503 NW Military ask for Nicole. She's fantastic. Tell her Amy or I referred you. :)
nice to see something at least mildly original :)
I'm sold.
I woke my wife up at 4 am & asked if it was okay for me to bang other chicks. She said "... what?" so I'm taking that as a big ol' yes.
hi. You don't know I exist. But I would LOVE it of you followed me love. <3 xx (:
hope you have a good day. :) TGIF
your ego is not as big as my penis.
hm *taps chin* I do have a free set coming and my stock is low....
hit mE up
Thought "that guy has a really strange pot belly" until I realized it was a very butch and pregnant woman.
I actually want to visit the bay area sometime soon, its the thugs across the bay I don't want to deal with
Its Hella Old (x
Boy, I need you to meet me halfway if you want me to be with you.
Did anyone take pictures or video of the high speed chase on Highway please send them to news or !!! Thanks!
we're putting on a fundraiser for qkid's school - lots of items donated by the community - 150 to be exact - gosh it's work!
It seems you can have laser treatments just about everywhere. If you could have one laser treatment/session on your body, what would it be?
ew get off my computr -_- ur burning my eyes gosh my ears already hurting lol
1D looked at the posters already <3
Hey at the very least I'll see you at the #SOBCon kickoff S.Media Club event. Looking forward to seeing you!
Never thought I'd say this, but #Bruins PP may be worse this year than last. At least in #NHLplayoffs. If it doesn't get better
Gosh damn woman, you talk way too much!
Minka. That is a not a post-breakup "look what you're missing" dress. That is a relationship funeral dress.
RT : But you havn't put my Ideastorm 1.0 ideas into production yet << Adding for input
#RoyalRumble The Best Upcoming Superstar JACK SWAggER my Pick
Please follow
I guess Derwin will retire and move to DC with Mel?
Good Luck
Omg my dog just pooped @ pet smart In the middle of the floor FML
BRIEF - Moody's says Oman's banking system outlook remains stable
This pub's right near my apt - definitely need to go check these out!
we'd love to give a giveaway!
I'll be you, let's trade shoes just to see what it'd be like to feel your pain, you feel mine <3
or "In Case We Die"?
Don't wanna get up! Didn't I earn the right to lay in bed all day?
The new version of the conference planner is going to let users add events. Was due for release on 4/20. Hopefully soon!
Awesome! How bout you?:)
Aw man. Well, can you tweet about Selena Gomez and James Franco then?
Remodel Tip: If u want 2 reuse existing faucets in a Kitchen or Bath remodel, atleast use new water lines & drains - WAY less headaches! : )
hey gusie, it was CC by the way...just sayin' - alexis
sounds great! Let's do it!
yeah, I'm going to. I hear it great with aged Gouda
You've got to be kidding me....
anytime someone follows me and the pic is two barely clothed women kissing, I block.
Ha, yes! I'll admit...he's got some raw talent, man.
Yes and... Share it, and you'll be amazed, By the spirit, that heats the rage..
Not much considering a couple friends had just left haha.
great! How is summer over dere?
You forgot the #eyeroll. Just FYI - Dennis let's everyone use them free of charge anymore LOL
WOW! RT : All this talk about Anthony Davis' grill...DID Y'ALL SEE HIS DADDY'S TEETH, THOUGH?!
I hope y'all get your signing. You're working really hard:)
Follow back (:
Baby J & at Jordan Ford 13010 IH-35 N w/the Swap Your Ride offer! Get cash rebates, super low financing & affordable monthly payments!
No one even knows what you trey go through. So it feels likes no ones listening</3
so its 2:30 & I just realized while trying to zone out while watching TV, that I have #Archer on my DVR. Is it too late? So sleepy, Dammit!
2:22 and officially starting this paper...another
I'd have to agree 100%. although at times it seems that some slept right through the lesson. 
now that's an attractive lady.
Thanks. details?
OHmyGAW! I didn't know that Ric Armendariz was HOT, as in his phone have been tapped for the longest time bcaz of ALIVIANE and other things
Never answer when it's private
For 5 minutes, Lyoto Machida made Jon Jones look human. Then that stopped. Damn, the best 5 min ANYONE had against JJ ended with a chokeout
I like ur profile pic, it's different yet cute
Small cat in the street. He didn't want my treat. "I love you, kitty," I said. But he didn't hear me; he was dead.
nothing to do... making brownies. c:
M.. good right about now :) RT Ham and cheese sandwich with a glass of red tampico >
Just installed the #mls matchday app for android...and am quite impressed by it.
Things sure do change
i just got a picture of a mc.griddle. :( im so sad right now !!!!!
done :) help trend
even the sun sets in paradise
Thank you, Sherry! Appreciate the mention. :)
Thanks for the RT's today!
Kids were 1yo during last title. Why hasn't Howland got them the last few years?
add sex and naps; you've got yourself a weekend
add its suppose to be like this much of the week
I am at the General Assembly for Occupy Baltimore. Come out ! This is important!
You cannot simultaneously prevent and prepare for war.
My cat always needs to sleep right where I am working.
thanks!!! rock on guys! looking fwd to seeing u guys live!!!!
After the time change this weekend it will be officially "winter" in LA. Holidays here we come...
It's like Charlie Brown always getting his kite stuck in a tree. I just always burn the pumpkin seeds. It's a tradition.
Is it one-price for all at AE outdoor, too?
It is better to travel well than to arrive. - Buddha
I will do whatever I can to stop myself from being sick ever again. I can't do this :(
Ohh...I thought I was.. I hate Twitter.. I have no idea what I am doing.
dm me where to send them
I got everything od bieber, ever a life sizw poster and a watcj of him! aand much more i love u bieber, MERRY CHRISTMAS!!!!!
Bring it, storms!
yeah. we got home at like... 7 last night. :)
Mom realized my obsession with zac efron. Lmao. "Gosh, will you ever stop obsessing over someone?"
Taker vs H still
Thanks so much! Feel free to follow me on my personal Twitter for all kinds of giant baby updates:
Can't wait!! Good luck today!
I don't know! But that just pisses me off like for real! Say what? When did she get into an accident?
IM GONE CHILL OUT TODAY
Finally joined the Facebook world! Like us!
sorry to inform you but LSU is my favorite football team lol
they do it cuz they know it embarrasses me.
v.hall
Thanks for sharing our massage deal!
Sorry replies are not collected on our wall so post something with #xeroxdrupa but do not start the tweet with :)
"everything rises and falls on leadership."
That one stress reliever.. ☺
DIVA STATUS! Omg LOVE the color red on you! :)
Many thanks for your support, the 3 days Shen Yun Show has been successfully done in SD, see you again next time (end of 2011/2012 new year)
In love w Refill by Elle Varner...A must listen...love the video too
Its amazing man!
Tina's end of summer BBQ and Bon fire and scary movies tonight I need someone to snuggle with??? Any takers
to win a game you actually have to show up....pretty much the opposite of big blue today
Sometimes the best wisdom and advice comes through the simple purity of a child. They don't see the world as complicated as adults do.
That battle was nothing compared to ICONic Boyz vs IaME from last season.
I wanna know who can make a devastating screwdriver. Any kind of juice and or booze.
On the last boss fight, man it's taking forever!
great bill!!!
yep great was at and still am for 8 more weeks a discipleship training
That's only marginally terrifying.
She wants to fall in love with you but shes afraid of getting hurt afraid of lies and afraid she'll end up with only tears in her eyes
Im so much better without you
Contact ClientRocket today to schedule a free demo and learn more about how RTOREWARDS can reward your customers and your business!
isn't it sad that i haven't been to one of your concerts yet :( i dream of the day i go to one of your concerts :/
yeah, Henderson win that fight !
YOU LIED TO ME :( Whatta dissapointment
My father taught me that sometimes you need to be silent. So at this moment I will be silent.
Im following u so follow me
like you ladies can get guys. Psh
The new mocha cookie crumble frappuccino at Starbucks>>>>>>
lol im cool..superheros never die..lol..naw I brought my dad in for some exam..
A house is not a home unless it contains food & fire for the mind as well as the body. ~Benjamin Franklin
thanks Rich. Yours isn't too bad either!
I can try lol
Morning meditation was great....
i should shove it up their vagina -__-
bravo viva le moda
Been so peaceful though, atleast I can think straight!
S/o to everyone who said they missed me lol i only been out for 2 days
Nice to meet you, fellow writers
Now I know why they call it dead week because it makes you want to kill yourself
nothing but hits at the court tavern in new brunswick tonight.
to have a testimony you have to have some test...thank you Lord
Hey Chad, thanks for the follow. I'm looking forward to connecting.
Good luck with your career.
"All I can do is be me. Whoever that is."
i do , but im not in the mood to skype right now
TONIGHT @ CLUB ELEGANCE LADIES FREE TILL 11 GUYS $5 $2 DRINKS TILL 12 ( TOP SELF INCLUDED) HOSTED BY DJ ROK &
It's a day late, but there is a page update this week! www.rocketrobinson.com
I gotta re up on medicine tomorrow . I feel terrible :(
Yes indeed! Good, but gave me pains in my back just thinking about it.
I'm really jealous your in vegas.
Congratulations! You'll be so missed!!!
Catch me on the 1's and 2's tonight at for Reaction Thursdays from 10 til the end, see you there!
lol me and are at panera bread an we said those were our name
Reflecting on my life and the road ahead. Thank u God for keep'n me.
::::Good morning, hope everyone have a wonderful tuesday^_^....Off to work!
I want it to be official so bad...
Twitter knows.
The 2012 Milwaukee Brewers: Not good enough to sell themselves, so they bring in a different sports athlete.
*gets on the road to Tennessee to kick some ass*
SEE? It's full of WIN!
I need a librarian.
Apparently not every celeb bought an invite to Clooney's bash.": Ha! Beach Boys' Bruce Johnston: Obama Is A Socialist "Asshole"
Well, it was local Elvis impersonator Tim Hilliard, anyway. Best voting experience ever. Way better than a dinky 'I voted' sticker.
": NATIONAL CLEAVAGE DAY" r u serious?
Does #Karmin realize that randomly adding "cheerio" out of context completely ruins a pop song I would normally enjoy?
so who did you get into a dumb ass debate with?
happy thoughts and pixie dust headed your way!
I love how you tagged me in a tweet and I retweeted and we weren't even following each other! Haha!
shit I remember Tommy, heavy news
Thats just the way it is
everyone please follow my dear buddy > she is very talented, sweet, cool, and fun to chat with
I'm not gonna get any sleep this weekend. :(
I agree Joy... communication is key... we have to share our thoughts, trials, failures, and learnings
Hello EME All bst FREE E-BOOK Award Winning novel GRAY RAINBOW JOURNEY Limited Time offer Contact
New on Now!! I'm ready for goosebumps!
Getting sick over spring break really sucks.
The new site is coming along good. Stay tuned it will be up real soon.
Not racist at ALL, are you? Get bent, moron.
walk tall like you own the place...
Thanks bud! You guys move up here to #MN and I'll let you edit whenever you want, haha.
RT and follow & AliciaD23 to watch me bring a product to market and see what I go through to make it a successful brand
Cal said it, not me. Quit hating/being really jealous
On my way to a barmitzvah service. Always fun.
"He was...a Wild Thing indeed. And despite what he said about his legacy, his wild rumpus will never end." - William Joyce on Maurice Sendak
Haha...None that I could recommend in good conscience! Would be great to see you in DC. Keep me posted of your plans!
God is great(:
Who got the new twitter on their iPods? I hate it!!! #givemeback #oldtwitter!
will tune in, great idea! educate them globally...
4 papers in 4 hours. Ok I can start studying now. Have to memorize as much as I can in 3 1/2 hours starting....now.
you look great for fashion friday!
i hate when people "K" me, i really do
100 Years of Solitude
WOOHOO! Got a SCII Beta-invite!
Hey #semweb, #opendata, #dh tweeps: Know of any history, foreign affairs, or international relations projects that employ #RDF?
RT : RIP Gary Carter. One of the toughest catchers of all-time...
Been lax in my thank yous for all the twitterluv! Peace!
just threw in an extra 500 for good measure. Lmao!
I love them all! Great idea!
what are your plans this week?!
The Raid: now I know all the ways you can break your spine. Also, maybe elbows are our most lethal weapon?
My evening mug of warm honey and cinnamon water is delish and comforting!
Not sure teachers as passive as appears. Why doesn't public stand up with teachers? LAUSD taking Federal $$$ away no outrage!
Join us from 4-6pm for 1/2 price sushi, wine, beer & cocktails!!! Who's ready to start their weekend early!?!
What are you hungry for?
aw c: you're having a baby c; lol. jk. food can't make you have babies. <3
Finally a day off tomorrow. Thank Jesus.
Freedom of speech is precious but speeking freely doesn't make you immune from the consequences of what you chose to say
can i still send one? sorry i forgot!
Friday YES!
Wish I could Follow twice!!
I saw u in front of the school;)
20 yr. public service crim. justice employee f/b 7 days private crim. just. empl. Its sad but true: Neither, anything to brag about!
Counter point to the fence issue: "Then the players wouldn't be able to get onto the field, duh."
Found a Chanterelle and a giant Lobster mushroom. Sauteed with pancetta. Also made gingerbread and acorn squash soup. Yum!
evidence which contradicts their theory. for example it has been released in the press that he was on phone with his girlfriend
Gallery Night was awesome! I thank everybody for coming out!
Working at Dog Days of Summer event tonight! Come watch us set the world record for most dogs at a costume parade!
Right?! Must fix that today!
wesley pipes
thanks for sharing...make sure 2 check out our #fb page...good discussion talkin about french films.
make my day and follow me?
“: It should be illegal to not like Will Ferrell”
Really, Go Daddy? You should fire your ad agency on Monday.
°o° CM just told us to have a "Magical Morning". That was...unusual. Nice, of course, but unusual.
Hey - it's been fun at #ASTD2012. Now just let me win the grand prize and go home! ;)
heh! well I appreciate your thoughts! I feel like his arms need their own film.
Proud to say I can still jam to after 6,000 plays!
The False Prophet is the Anti-Christ
Tall men.
When the quake hit: My kid ran down stairs, fell on lawn, held onto the grass (brainy!)
Thanks for the link... Very interesting. I'll watch the entire segment later this week and let you know how it goes. Killer!
hey! follow me for amazing healthy & delicious snack ideas!!
#scarymovierulestoliveby don't have sex with another character within the first 15 minutes of the film.
Attention buyers: we've got lots of great sales going on now, including and take a look-...
With GB out, I'm looking for a NE/NYG rematch. Gonna be good games today!
My best friend in kindergarten was named Shandy. Now that I think about it WTF?
I think she fell asleep.
RT : Thomas Martinez and dominated that stage tonight! #well done
Wow! Go you
Spider on my windshield. Hit him with the flex...of my wipers.
I look up from tweeting and there are at least 20 guys on stage...only one is rapping. Why.
Fa real!
well this room just got a little bit smaller
Sleeping in tomorrow!! #YAYforbeingaSENIOR :))
127 hours is tight(:
The kids across the street challenged me to a water fight, so I'm currently boiling the water
Raven Symone its all good what makes u Happy thats all that counts live your do what make u Happy
How many agents in Washington did you say had quit/dropped their license?
lifes pretty good.
wow ashamed
I'm really falling for you. And I can't stop myself.
I dislike nights like these where I reminisce on what we shared n I lay here alone....ur so close bt yet so far away
Thanks love!
I want a yellow flag.... STAT!! #daytona500 that is all :)
Next sunday i shall watch #thehungergames movie by which time i hope to be reading the third and unfortunately last book the though makes 😢
About time! What are your plans for the sun?!
#Occupy should understand that #Capitalism & #FreeMarkets built this nation. If unhappy, #Cuba is only a swim away. RT
Out beyond ideas of wrongdoing and rightdoing, there is a field. I'll meet you there.
Thank you! It will all fall into place soon!... I hope!
you can do it! If I can do it, anyone can. Although the few first ties took me 45 minutes and help from a how-to YouTube video.
My wife sometimes texts me at work, telling me that I've earned a trip to the woodshed. I will think about that ALL day...
So yeah we all know Alex is Sexy!
What is your favorite part about the holiday season in your office?
Ron Paul 2012. New Ad Campaign will blow your mind.flv: via
I'm talking where the venue is played itself. Not your staff or anything of that nature... Need feed back please!!!
I miss watching Ben Sheets hit
Your totally rad skull print is ready to be picked up!
We are on every Wednesday 9-11(pm) on RADIOKOLAMERICA.COM keep spreading the word about our show
Can't wait to get off work !
so there I was big game fishing with Mark Cuban along the Galapagos islands...
No amount of alcohol has been shown to be safe during pregnancy.If consumed in larger amounts during pregnancy,it can definitely cause harm.
breaks sometimes help! Get creative juices going. We like snacks.
944 march issue: exclusive w/ chris cantore, launch of HIVE241, U-31's makeover, spring fashions from SD boutiques. www.944.com/magazine/
So you girls are coming to Boston on August ; where to be exact
Want to receive special offers? Text “BJ” to the number “86677“ Thanks, and happy eatin’s!
SO EXCITED TO SEE MY SUPERSTARS TONGIHT and goodluck<3
Well if/when the HEAT win... I can be on the list??? If not sometime before?
lol True ! And I'll have to go listen haha
Right back at'cha!
Some people are so judgmental. Sometimes it even ends a life. Watch what you say. #stopbullying be a friend. <3
See you all soon! Looking forward to it!
yes ! At least you're leaving !
Done packing! Heading to CA tomorrow. Which radio station plays NCOE in San Francisco? I wanna hear this song on a radio!!!!
I hate being stuck in a studio when there's so much great football being played!!! I need a job that enables me to GO to the games.
Thanks Mr. President!!
About to play iPOPS Event #1 $200k GTD, $109 buy-in...$5k starting stack, $33k for first! Here is some self imposed
My thoughts & prayers are with all the people of Ohio who were affected by the tornadoes, especially those still searching for loved ones.
Today a reader, tomorrow a leader. - Margaret Fuller
Berryline Fenway rolls out Raspberry-Lime flavor alongside Salted Caramel and the ever tasty Original!
Interian's talk at #nethums had a lot of terms in it but she did a nice job of laying out the fullness of the glossary. I want the slides.
hey Tim...come worship with us today 11a.m. Your story has changed lives - thank you. (Chapelrock.org)
the stringbooks will have the slip of paper in them, like the first time. she'll also post the grade in eservices.
Hey friends of , our Blue Box team will be next week (incl. party w/ Pivotal & New Relic on Monday!), so let's connect!!
Yankees - Red Sox = best rivalry in sports, period. They make baseball in May exciting.
Europe is fucked investors to European central bank 1 trillion dollars not enough
hey peeps...put on yo happy face...it's FRIDAY!!!
Cmon hawks we still in this #TeamHawks. Joe Johnson you got to come thru!
Happy Holidays everyone!!!! Don't forget to rock our sister page Rock This Restaurant
Before enlightenment: Chop wood, carry water. After enlightment: Chop wood, carry water.
Get in here for J-FAT Tuesday Chef is cooking up some of his favorite cajun dishes!
wait. I thought you just got a Twitter so i go to ur page expecting 4 tweets.... Nope. Over 15K..
what's going on at 1871? our office is right around the corner on lasalle
Spinning at Haven for beautiful crowd...
schools fun, it leads to $$$.
so high
to plant some early spring vegetables if the garden dry’s up a little.
by the way don't you just love Tyrion?? I think who would make an awesome drinking buddy and a great king
Having technical difficulties with e-mail. Is it the weather or what?
Happy #MothersDay to all the mommies out there- inc. Puppy & Kitty Mommies like me! :-)
if we an just make it thought the night.... haha
Struggle with cravings? Most people are dehydrated. Next time you have a craving,drink 1-2 to cups of water & wait 20 minutes.
Hope everyone is enjoying this beautiful sunshine! Don't forget about the Munchie Express tonight! We start taking orders at 7PM!
What two #Beatles songs did #RingoStarr write? #TeamTrivia is tonight at 9!
Today is a national holiday in #Mexico. Do you know why?
Great results for the #Packers & #blues yesterday
Aw shoot. I just realized I have to wake up early tmrwww.
Lots of hawks and skunks. But only farm animals in our #upstatemanhattan forest are escaped chickens.
I want a pic of him on the carousel!
who wanna take a trip to dubai wit me any offers
"I'm..angered by the 'posing in a bikini six weeks after baby'..We created a human being..Let's celebrate!" -The Office star, Jenna Fischer
And, I might add, those are some AMAZING tubes. Does Goodyear make them??
My love goes out to those freeze out there during the Christmas parade
Ik hiding back stage at the moment maybe i can sneak a nap :}
Well, I was excited for the first two numbers...
any game is on there any time you need to watch
#TakeMeBack && ( #Possibilities < in the car )
cuz you aren't having to produce actual forward momentum on the spin bike. Just like treadmill v. ground running.
Hes not hyper at all! :)
My iphone has been syncing for 4 hours. wtf -___-
Freaks.. thanks for having dinner w/ me tonight :) 2 for 25 is enuf for 5 lol
at what time do I re-complain about my horrible office situation
My boyfriend broke up with me, my best friend stop talking to me, now all i can do is sit and cry my eyes out #ineedahug </3 :'(
Errata! 1x10^100 MT : Between 's proposal + 's bb the #HCIL is 2/2 on dynamic talks on great research!
I'm about to fall asleep on my desk. HELP!
I wear boxer briefs not boxers cause I get compliments on how my junk looks in them
Opening a wine bottle is like figuring out a man. You may think you have it, but then you get stuck.
gonna rain tomorrow.... cool...
i'm so sorry. i can't relate at all. but i'm just sorry you're hurt bc of it. =( *big squeezy hug*
Moving truck just showed up and the guys don't look happy... I think I'm going to write "8 Secrets to Stress Free Moving" Anyone Interested?
- glad you figured it out. Give us a holler in the AM if you need help resolving or have additional questions.
I now remember how great it is to be single. Holy fuck. <3
The m#nkeys coming...
Amen! RT : Negative people try to create an atmosphere for you, don't adopt it -just calmly walk away & smile :-)
you sent me: i dont hate it i really dont like it. but nevermidnd.
see you this afternoon in the we've missed you!
sorry Peter I was really unable to work. See ya soon Joe
Very sad to hear about the death of legendary trombonist, composer, and arranger Bob Brookmeyer.
Every beer goose island makes is delicious. Recommend Sofie or Matilda if you come across it
Im stupid fuckin' poor(damn near homeless) but I stay clean though
Announcing something BIG later this morning...stay tuned.
TUMBLING TODAY!!! wish me luck in hopes i don't break something!!!:D
Smh. Typical Melissa response. Lol RT lmao ily2 . N i did read it .. You bought sprite on ebay. Typical lenora shit.
Rest in peace, Liz Taylor.
NEOGAF IS DOWN!!! What the HELL Am I going to do at work now :(
I wished I lived in jerset doe
Dear all, Our Shenzhen office will be closed from Oct 1 to Oct 7 due to National Holiday (in China). Please conact US office for any emerg
THANK YOU
Ion Want That Hoe I Want That Bitch
but u content and that's all that matters but if the bootie ain't even good wtf is the purpose like at least bone me good
I said hard work, not working to get something hard lol
Going to eat at O' Chucks!!! (Charlies)
Now it's 3 days late and 3 days with no tracking update. Either you lost my stuff, or Richmond, CA doesn't understand tracking tools
Peter, how much coffee today?
so upset and mad at myself for not knowing no betta
WHAT ARE YOU DOING MIGGY
Yep that's why you should go to sleep haha
how are u now???hallo 2...
It's 3 in the morning. WHY AM I NOT ASLEEP?! I'm freaking WIDE AWAKE!
I have just completed the final paper of my final DMin class-sort of melancholy after many years of school-thank God for all His help!
How is everyone's Wednesday going? Any plans to attend a game this weekend?
Good Morning Friends!!! Have a CURRYOUS Day!
that's what I did. Sold about 40 shirts and obviously more you order, cheaper discount is. Just time consuming w/ shipping
Wrapping up an event proposal listening to Kem's Kemistry album. Amazing work.
JUST got home. I'd say it was a successful Cinco de Mayo with friends.
On my way back to #Cleveland, can't wait to sleep in my own bed.
Hey its me Rita Salon Ramsey are n the A or back home
how bout lsu:)
Goodmorning all you beautiful people out there!!
unfollowed me :c
I know there is only 1 in a 21million chance that you will see this tweet. But can i get a follow back please?
I have a musical theatre showcase this weekend you should come with everyone!
So, do you believe in talking snakes?
I fucking hate Bitches that have no class, and no ass!! lol
Just landed in Vegas, will be sporting #Packers gear during my poker tourney!
Have an amazing Holiday with your friends and family!
Merry Christmas Eve to everyone. :)
The only thing sad about last night was not getting any trick or treaters....oh well more candy for me!
Tonight I'll be spinning a chop'd & screw'd set @ Jaguars Gold Club, #strippers 'n #screw; you know what to do!
“: and hair is EVERYTHING to me!! #thatisall” Awww (blushing)
I can't wait to leave for Alabama next week!
Decidedly different audience for Incubator Arts Project's Ring Cycle. Also different liquor situation.
Food Lust!!!
#GDC #GDCOnline Ross Borden of NCSoft is spending his time with existing users, really wants to understand what his community is thinking
is like 600 bucks so nobody besides people who work on the industry go to any of those. SXSW has gotten way too huge toseemuch
Everbank IPO Closes Up 6% After Cutting Price - Wall Street Journal
Philly wins!! Nice!!
Could it be better? #indy500 weather during
Toni you're one of my favorite singers ever I grew up on as a kid in the 90s. Don't ever stop b/c you are so diverse!
Long-range goals and your faith keep you from being frustrated by short-term failures!
Queen is perfect study music
1 more night afterwards
yeah!! Congrats Lavonte!!
Poppy just forwarded u another email. Is it ok if I come home around 7:30 or 8? If not I can be there by 6. Let me know cause either one ...
GL! You are awesome! :)
Don't forget Betty Lash does great tinting for those lashes too ;)
Tea should be taken in solitude. ~C.S. Lewis
This RT leave it to the bullpen to fuck up again
Wow. This lunch delivery and these sunflowers. You killed it Happy Valentine's Day! Besos
Well, just ran 3 miles with the crew from El Show de Raul Brindis y Pepito at Memorial Park! Wow, been a long time...exhausted!
Last final!
Allowing myself a fifteen minute walk and midday mental break.
no comments about your girl es?
But far many more times times, humility is the key.
#ThingsThatYouShouldKnow how to relax your ankles to increase tap speed, clarity, and musicality. www.etapdance.com
Pick it up !
I know sometimes you guys like to look at things in the Midwest. I didn't think that was the case here. :-)
Listening to David Cross standup at work would be more enjoyable if I weren't constantly terrified that my headphones had slipped out
Happy anniversary!!
well said bro lol
if only you could see the instant smile I just got! Well let's just say this is my face c:
The party is well underway. Remember we will be tweeting the winners of this years #EmmyChicago starting soon!
Oh I believe bad-dressed 20 somethings exist in Manhattan... I just don't need to watch them on TV.
I would really like to go to a day spa right about now.
You might be a redneck if... the blue book value of your truck goes up and down depending on how much gas it has in it. Jeff Foxworthy
I want to reach out to any singers out there who think they can't make it to their dreams. Just keep going. Keep dreaming. Keep pushing.
you know whats cool? You dont follow me! :D Haha just kidding! Not cool :( So you should follow me (; Just saying :D
bitch you coming tonight with us?
Now Thats' wussup I'm lookin for the same thing in a guy...hard to come across
God of delight,let me see the world today through ur joyful eyes..may I join with you in delighting in all that you have created~unclttdhrt
Oh yeah
I'm not lazy, ill bust my tables. Your hate is making me sad 😭😭😭
you coming to my open house?!
Y'ALL LIKE MY NEW NAME? It's from The Other Guys. xD.
Well I sing and I dance when I glance in my pants. "Enormous Penis" from the Bob and Tom show
Loving these Exxon Mobile commercials during the Masters.
loving busy days at the office interrupted by lunch with i could get used to this..
I heard through the grapevine that you were in need of kind words. All of us Cat Fans wish you well.....even the old ones!
I've heard from that land sharks are rampant in PCB. If you feel something nibbling at your toes, look out!
Hello back at you ;D
Happy birthday to 1 of my lil bros
Chap's name is Matt. He's the one who handed me WSUM's new promo CD "Ladytickler." Just brilliant, I say. And he knows his cattle.
A6 Focus on EXTREME target marketing – understand highest propensity buyers' needs & why they buy. Q6 How can treadmills b avoided?
thank you for the mention, my friend.
Great session by Solo librarians do amazing work!
It amazes me how Batman can be in a room of superpowered folks and still be the most bad@$$, menacing dude in the room. Period.
I Can Haz Cheezburger in Paradise.
we need to link soon
WeHo ... almost 3 months in and you all are getting so much STRONGER! Lots to b proud of!
The one that says I can't DoS users of wifi devices just because I don't like their signal. Trying to find the reg now.
WORD!! LOL RT It's Aloha Friday, no work till Monday IS A LIE.
Sperm Donor: 76 kids... Wow is all I can say.
I'm shaking too
I would truly like to meet You Oprah to share my hope for another from experience. How can I meet You?
As you can see, I spend my time thinking about very important things.
hell yeah!
Totally stealing that. Just FYI.
The fact that my twitter is unfollowing people.<<< -_-
A5: i hate when i hear myself mess up while presenting. it's hard to get back on track because i'm yelling at myself in my head
Wazaa Carlos...! C:
War of the Roses was HILARIOUS! How does someone forget to tell their girlfriend they are moving to Africa? lol
Up working and listening to great music on
No i think it got zero dislikes :p
define "perfect"
ferkkkk. Forgot about that current event D:
I really need for #lifeclass to NOT have technical difficulties!!
God sleeps in the minerals, awakens in plants, walks in animals, and thinks in man
“: The Patriots just agreed to a one-year deal with free-agent wide receiver Donte Stallworth.” going to work in free agency
I'm learning so much about Chicago's bath scene today.
Wow its been awhile since I've last tweeted, Sorry guys!!! I need to get on here more often.
WOWOWOW Congrats Marie!
"Sports Night" may seriously be the best show in the history of primetime television. Okay not really, but how did this only last 2 seasons?
You can have up to 5 YouTube videos for your Google Places Listing page, so make the most out of it!
Up early getting it done. It's not even 10a and I'm already tired!
Hoping this music thing pays off before I turn back to the old me
Heading to lunch with George Crumb. What a great day.
" im predicting an ACL tear. Hope im wrong!!" I think he swallowed his chaw and faked the knee so he could leave and puke
The ripest peach is highest on the tree. - James Whitcomb Riley
What should the singular nongendered pronoun be?
Thanks for the follow JAKE!
binaural sound wave music and noise-free headphones. I use Bose but all brands ok. Am in semi-trance & writing/editing happens.
What is your all time favorite movie? Why?
I'm coolin. Call me so we can set the date so ur people to
Well said RT : Chrysler ad was well done but not believable. Eminem wouldn't drive it & negative impression of anything Detroit
Hey Nutter.. I have the 11 version of MLB. Do you the latest is worth picking up?
Wake up ref!!! He was clearly on the line!
i found peace. 🙌
Can't wait to celebrate 's wedding with and !
Mom is listening to Boyfriend for the first time. She hates it.
Longest preliminary hearing ever! Someone save me from court boredom.
One month from now I will be another month older counting down the days..where did the years go. Okay I will be 22 no need to over exaggrate
have you used the Beyond the Zone bleach? I was planning on getting that for streaks
Your start-up which provides work for those with #Aspergers sounds amazing. Make a video telling your story
Xjhfujdnjx OMG My Cousin Video Chatted with Chanti From IaMe OMG Nathalie your So LUCKY :D :)ILYShawty<3
Liking this Google Instant
listening to an awesome track and feeling goosebumps,butterflies & a smile coming over bc it's so good!!!
Shot Out to they FOLLOW BACK
i got him on facebook already lol, we chilled a couple of months ago a few times
Thanks for RTs
He lovz me, he lovz me not, he lovz me, he lovz me not, he lovz me, he lovz me not, he lovz me, he lovz me not. ="( i was rite th 1st time.
Great presentation from cant wait to see slides up close.
can u get him to follow me thanks
totally appreciate what different athletes in different sports can do.. It's amazing and I like watching that and learning
we wish you were here again this year with us! We'll miss you on the YA Stage...
lmfaooooo nah were still talkin bout how eminem sucks compared to meek mill
Citizen United has NO logic at all, if it's correct ,so is Dred Scott . I used to respect the Supreme Court, but now ,not so much.
Lol good point RT : You think they would really go get real jobs?
doesn't get much better
yea. Don't see much blue there?
Looks like the "official" Dane County Republicans have finally joined the twitters. All two of them!
Hahaha did he hear her?
Sometimes it sucks cause all u want is to get #noticed by so #SaySomethin i wish u make my #wishcometrue and followed me..)
#Shoutout to all my new sexy followers :o)
luv the movie DRIVE !!!! Ryan Gosling is doin it big
A virus named Gotye. No offense, viruses.
I hate when people text you without a convo in mind
I should be working on my law paper, but instead I drafted a blog manifesto.
Anyone from out of town going to need hotel accom? I have special rates coming later this afternoon for hotels right on our light rail!
Rehearsal with Working on a song.
Thanks for the mention!
Moderating "Real World Rails Apps at Massive Scale," at #railsconf. Looking forward to sharing our experiences from the trenches.
sorry. i forgot. you dont need me anymore.
Some people can't make an ugly face an still be cute like me. Lol.
My baby cousin audibly pooped her diaper tonight. I took it as my cue to leave, as per usual.
Thanks for the follow. Let's cook up an event on Kitchen PLAY to showcase California dairy products! --Casey
Chris Mann!
ames Naismith may have invented Basketball, but Dean Smith perfected it. Happy 81st Birthday, Coach.
Why not give a PARACHUTE to each plane - so that it can be opened at times of possible plane crash! Pls RT ! Please retweet this!
hey friend I'm not either will follow comments on twitter
Terry it seems like we were supposed to chat about Briarcliff. Shall we?
and most of all people need to feel safe to be themselves
Jethro welcomes Chad Fledmann of Lawranceburg In. to its Pro Team Staff.
Refs are ridiculous. James runs into Anthony and they call a foul? Making sure the Knicks dont stand a chance early are we NBA?
Happy Birthday Cody, many years of life, I wish you well, and that his career will continue pumping throughout the world <3 31
I think it's Friday.
Anti-clarinet / -alto bias MT : In a better world, Sidney Bechet would be (a) widely known and (b) heard everywhere, all the time.
you look really pretty!
I think it is crazy the #Packers play only 1 division rival in the first 9 weeks and 5 in the last 7 weeks WTF?!
I guess we could FB chat or something. haha
": I'm in need of a ping pong table... #withdrawl #addictedprobs" I literally laughed out loud reading that
Happy Mothers Day my dear-enjoy dinner
he is almost as perfect as Luke Bryan lol
"H2O: Making of.." is complete! Only 9 days left until the Red Carpet Premiere. See you on the 18th.
RT : April 1st is the day that most people try to show that they are witty, only to prove beyond a doubt that they are not.
When people talk about not being able to concentrate while reading a school book, bitch please, i don't even attempt.
Most SOMEDAY'S never happen..Make it happen NOW!
great article on buss compression!
Thank you so much for tweeting this! I hope you're having a very excellent time right now <3
Teacher Appreciation Week starts today. Are your kids doing anything fun for their teachers this week?
I was getting to that one Ralph thats 1 of my favorites
#NowPlaying: feat. Diddy-Dirty Money, Dirty South, Skylar Grey, and Becky Jean Williams - "Coming Home at 4 A.M. [Kaskade Mash-Up]
yep, got the person's plate no. and credit card no. (he was pulling out of an Arby's). So hopefully we can catch him.
Determination go hand in hand with perseverance
Thank you for all your support!!!!!!
what movie did you (try to) go see? We just got out of Avengers. So good!
Tifty decided to eat a dead bird on our morning stroll. I'm not letting her give me kisses the rest of the week.
Want a job for my birthday!
Same Here .!
Boney M - daddy cool! As BESsy!
Always has me dying thou xD
it was a great group, and Lynn and your BIL Bill are my faves!!!
You have to have a vision for what you want. Don't just see things as they are--envision what they could be. - Anthony Robbins
I have it - very good just need to know your cable co. Acct #
I am not South Beach..I am Causeway street..I am a Celtic.
Austin Mahone.1 name.my inspiration.the one i look up to.the one i will give my support to endlessly & unconditionally <111
This party's gonna be a disaster. Bring on the drinks.
Yo's curve on that k was sick
I'm afraid yet compelled to ask: When was the last time you ate turkey?
Are we really about to get shutout at home, by a f*cking expansion team?
See she is a good spirit :) unlike you hydro. Stop being a fuck boy.
Been sitting on the bed waiting for at least a text going in 2 1/2 hours now. Expected to have left so long ago, and I'm a bit worried.
seriously, you guys.
so glad you had a good time! It was a blast for us too.
#nfais12 Looking at patterns rather than individual tracking might be the best way to go when looking at metrics
What is your favorite thing about the fall season?
YEAR ZERO - a blast!
P.S #YOLO guy is wearing a conductor hat
Thanks Bro! Blessings and peace to you!
brilliant idea for a Twitter: explaining portmanteaus from Finnegans Wake!
Happy New Year!! :)
IF ANYBODY WANNA BOOK MUSIC AND OR TXT 3053609305 TELL HIM CHRIST SENT YOU
My 4yr old, $35 mp3 player is dying. Needed: non-ipod, portable music thingy that charges and transfers files via usb, under $50.
But I'm patching the ath9k module ahead of time in case I do have wireless issues. Even though I didn't last time this happened.
"park's closed, moose out front should have told you"
RT : IBM is going to do a breakout on private clouds and demonstrating how Watson uses technology to beat humans
YES! THEY ACKNOWLEDGED THE PUNT! Logic rocks.
=) RT : I google distance, date&location 2 see what comes up. Helped me find in Chi while on biz trip.
Spring Showcase is ONE WEEK AWAY! If you don't have your ticket, they are still available... $5 gets you to the greatest showcase.
MirkoPastaToco authentic italian restaurant, pasta is our passion fresh pasta is our obsession, LUNCH DINNER CATERING TAKE OUT 678-704-2700
In the moments when the wind isn't blowing, the sunshine feels absolutely amazing.
Trimmin' 's beard?
yayyy I like that better!
I think Im gonna watch All That. #the90's
for the cost of F-35 program, you should have full escort...
How the heck do people make different meals each day? I need lessons from a #mom. Help! I'm about to make a turkey burger disaster.
Especially if you are about to shiv someone.
#LeifOveAndsnes at the piano tonight at #Carnegiehall. So good!
well that's awesome!!:)
pinhead larry.
Nothing says holidays like a little gingerbread in your life!! Come in and try our gingerbread Mocha... It's on special this week:)
#NameYourFavoriteRapper A lady who works at Macy's. She does a lovely job with my Christmas presents.
No not because of Dannys Daughter I actually liked the name its amazing when I hear it I think of such an awesome person soya
I think #oomf will literally never learn their lesson. Smh haha
don't you know you're not supposed to have you phone on when you're on an airplane? you rebel
I hate watching tv it makes me feel unproductive
its open mic Saturday correct?
we will! I promise!
The final countdown
first 94.9 is gone now the bucks!? damn i'm starting to not hate laredo but dislike's the word i'd go for....
Holler! Looking forward to & Who's Next Battle for the Best at SX! shout out to for following:)
Hide 'n' seek champs: 1. Osama Bin Laden 2. Waldo 3. My phone on silent
awesome. Stains!
When did Justin Bieber voice get so dang sexy?!
Seems like an Eric Kumerow type. #Kumerow was a tweener.
Balt Co Council mtg starts soon. Speed cam contract, transgender bill & term-limits bill.Lots of people here 2 testify on transgender issue.
We're heading down to Dickenson just north of Galveston to bid on a house that burned down. Call us if youre in the area & have work for us!
I hate feeling sick. :/
I think I will. We will have to talk about on here so she has to check to make sure we aren't saying bad things.
Looking for two women to pass out FLYERS for LUCI today! Who is game? We can give you a fabulous store credit! Must be here by 1 or 115
Had a great tutorial on the many useful press release options. Social media vs Traditional Press is a hot topic for sure! Make sure to inte…
it was amazing!!!
Wish I would've known I could pass off my excess quantity of beef to you before I ate 3 pounds of it in 2 days.
Yess I'll be sure to check it out!(: & follow back please??(:
my mentor wants me to make a vision board, go to yoga & read 's new book ... in that order!
This is my favorite Twitter conversation of all time.
We're going to be re-inventing ourselves w a new handle Thurs 3/1. Not to worry, it won't affect your following status. Stay tuned!
i love that video soo much its hillarious... especially when he stalks the goose LMFAO
It's not like we can't talk, I'll just be far away lol
Gotta stay in shape! Gotta stay in shape! I just keep telling myself that, but I'm still not motivated to workout!
Can you share the list? Is it parties only? :)
While the spirit of neighborliness was important on the frontier b.c they were so few, it's even more important now b.c they are so many.
I'm so sleepy I'm out. Night World!!!
I bet you that in 5-6 years when current Beliebers are 18+, if Justin Bieber were to run for prez, he would win.
Thinking about you! I took care of my mom on catheter and I know what a pain it is. Hoping for best case diagnosis for you, xoxo
Watched movie Beginners tonight. Thought it was a pretty great film. Recommended watching.
Another Meal in the works...another Culinary Catastrophe waiting to happen.
Get better soon. We all miss you on First Take. Charissa is so goddamn annoying and anti-skip
Who watched that Richard Leakey program last night? Man, that was good.
I might marry the first girl who puts Sailor Moon as her FB profile pic XD
I would like to check it out one night. Sounds like you guys have some good stuff happening!
I watched Marlon Byrd's first 2 at-bats tonight for the #Cubs. He was pulling off the ball so bad I think he ended at-bat coaching 3rd.
Watching tornado swarm 2011, it still gives me goosebumps
"Start small and grow from there" ré: social media for #smallbiz @#ebiznow Philadelphia event.
if Austin says 'pretty hot babe' in the song, i think he should say nigga now.
I have about 5 different scenarios for the Browns with the first picks that I at least somewhat like. Hopefully one of them happens.
Dear enemies, haters & doubters, I have so much more for you to be mad at. Just be patient.
RT : 26% of all McDonald's employees in Ontario, Canada admit to putting some type of bodily fluid in McDonald's food
I'm performing the ceremony for Kurt and Jen!
you got dis. In other news are you sad about Dick Clark
Hahaha well I am glad you watched it!
wow!! great response so far to our new Community Links 2011/2012 Jewish Calendar !! Getting SOLD OUT quick . So call now if you would like …
Jarana & spoken word Anyone? Anyone?
Biggest Cities on World - CGEinfo – Central Government Employees ...
I have a 102 fever
In chicago-the bears still suck!!
There we go Celtics! Tied up 1-1 bringing it back to Boston!
A comedian can't heckle. Read the fucking definition. Verb: Interrupt (a public speaker) with derisive or aggressive comments or abuse.
I qualitatively appreciate your passion, but in a court of law, everyone is innocent until proven guilty.
To anyone who thinks drug use is a victimless crime note #WhitneyHouston's autopsy revealed her heart was damaged by years of #cocaine use.
No one team in #postseason is far and away better than their opponent
haha . Im at a friends house. Me &cody got back together.
Thanks for the kind words Jay. You too!
I DO
watching dateline nbc
Yes i did
sound like someone? RT : Oh, you don't know the words to a song? Please, mumble random sounds in the tune. It sounds great.
what church u think David go to ? Lol
I have to get this physical at 4.
Last night a certain Dalek shut down a tea partier from AZ who called me a fool for thinking a thesis could be a brief statement.
id like to see you try
In my pajamas at 5pm... Winter break has officially arrived.
Is watching 'Idol for the first time in years. Not impressed!!! I would laugh off J.Lo if she tried to give me advice.
i am a miracle
Well the lady continues to make me smile!!! How was your Thanksgiving? Glad you like the music.
52 degrees already and not many clouds in the sky...what a great day we have brewing in the PNW!
We had Outback for dinner, and left the kids at home with hotdogs.
haha, thanks for listening!
The Blind Side! 🏈
Can't keep my eyes open anymore. Dennis is still doing something with our DUCF display involving a dremel. He is handy, and brave!
I use LogMeIn as well.
Call Speaker Perez now at 916-319-2056 and ask him to Save Election Day Registration. Pls retweet and circulate goo.gl/wsBSh
That question is like asking to vote for politicians. Which is the lesser of two evils.
Today is the only ill go to church 20 min late and not get a seat
Wasn't exactly a hit in 2011, either. RT : 40 degrees and raining didnt help either.
Etta James made me love jazz starting at age eleven.
You're welcome! RT : Thanks for the follow!
Everyone have a blessed Sunday!
I can't imagine if Edward Maya comes to Singapore. Whatever it is, hope it all will only happen after this year
sounds like it.
sure,of course i follow:)) #followed ❤ :)))
To everyone who cards me: no, my license isn't fake. Yes, I was actually born in 1982. Please stop commenting about how young I look.
Let me never fall into the vulgar mistake of dreaming that I am persecuted whenever I am contradicted.
Meet - non-profit provides 5 Star lodging to Veterans and families returning from deployment, at no charge.
hahah yeaah by puttin paper clouds and cloth windows
geek confession: I never saw Tangled.
Da ppl dat we got into it with den got cool with lol so much shit happened on 44th man lol
sounds like fun, but as much as I would love to be you for the day, I am not going to be in SF this weekend. 😞 /cc
I'm definitely gonna make it!
Thank you for your prompt reply - glad that #bankofamerica is allocating resources to twitter!
WHEN AND WHERE 😍
Kids these days I wish my friends would get shot or something like fuck you guys.
"I have never been hurt by what I have not said.until later xoxo
I'm late, but what is this random idea?
They say you die twice. once when you stop breathing and a secind time, a bit later on when somebody says your name for the last time.
Employers ask to 'poke' around on Facebook profile and get ur password #AM New York
Difficulty is the excuse history never accepts.-Edward R. Murrow
A ticket going spare for Wyatt Salon: jonnymugwump: I have a spare ticket if someone wants to pm me- forgot about my sisters wedding! :)
. our secret's revealed!
Trying to kick water uphill. Harder than it looks.
Games back on! motor dryers ftw!
#ObamaBookTitles: The Guinness Book of Everyone Being Equal and Conforming
When it comes to losing weight, you need to burn or cut out 3,500 calories a week to lose a pound.
Ah. Thank you! :D I hope so too! That week was a blast!
Can't wait! My rhetoric grad school prof suggests your style shld be studied! : finish a new novel before 2012 ends.”
“: Remember when you loved me? Yeah, I miss that.”
At fells point. Baltimore is great!
Lawd, Sally broke Grandma!
You'll be missed :( next month perhaps!
Why do banks get to give away student loans? has done nothing but screw up the great process Citigroup and I had.
#RANGERS choke #OhCanada!! Go Canada!!!
No, not quite. Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagen beat any Bush nominees. OTOH, the snuffs via drone suck.
I love when my dog dreams.
u said it was frustrating an painful living with r mom but think about this what if ur dad left when u were 6 and ur mom(c)
I just got a new NYU ID to replace the one I accidentally threw away last night. On the bright side, my picture is better this time!
So true!
I need my fucking phone to ring with you on the other side.
Wishing our lead singer, David Klapatch, a very happy birthday!
Not Your Father's Wholesale Market... The New Philadelphia Wholesale Produce ... - Jim Prevor's Perishable Pundit Not Your Father 's Whol
are you in Vegas and didn't tell me? Bo
I'm trying to maintain a positive attitude.
AWESOME!!! Love it!
no love at all, Miami sucks lol
Tell me why does everything thats bad feel so fucking good
what is wrong with you hittu. it's worth the effort just to talk to me.
put ya headphones on!!! Lol
only wants to see the VOW because of channing tatum
Republicans are basically the anti-Robin Hoods. All they do is steal from the poor and give to the rich. Vote for Obama in 2012!!!
The leopard print is in full force on BBW tonight! Rarrrrr
lol just saw the Mini Lady Gaga , she's so cute :]!
thanks for follow! Always happy to retweet
Me too! And that's why I needed another program to manage more ;-) LOL
Did you know that April is Child Abuse Prevention Month? What are your plans for #april?
I told you il buy you one! :)
Wish I could go to France next weekend to watch the semifinals and possibly a Federer and Nadal final.
my mama going pick up my bday cake but im not allowed to see it until my dinner tonight -__-
When life hands me lemons I eat them so I won't get scurvy.
O: just died haha
thanks to all my new followers from #teetalk!
I have a lake in my front lawn. I just hope my garden hasn't washed into the street by the time this passes.
#teamsheikie baby RT : All my fans you are #1 inn the world. I love you and respect you forever
entiendes Ingles? I am writing a report comparing your school and UOC in Barcelona for a doctoral class.
Happy President's Day!
IMO that should have been a goal
Hilarious doesn't even cover it! LOL
We're rockn' the animal print today! Woohoo!
ok man, 5 a.m. everyday,after school as well.promise ima get u playin top ball once u get to school,just gime ur commitment
RT : RT : I pray for a more friendly, more caring & more understanding human family on this planet ~ Dalai Lama
Thanks so much!
Two for twenty sounds like the move for tonight .
Come visit the Jossey-Bass booth today during the Expo Only sessions-- starts now! We are booth #1115-- see you soon!
Just finished my 1st semester of grad school, past everything-I think I did very well-have to wait for grades.
Walked home during some type of tropical storm. Phone got water damaged. It's Florida SUNSHINE STATE -.- Will it ever stop raining?!
Heh, thanks. I follow so many wonk types--hope the debate stuff doesn't bug too much!
Check out Voo Davis on iTunes and order a copy of "A Place For Secrets"
If only I had come prepared! :(
/// Happy Born Day to
Could never forget a face like that (: Nice picture (:
Looking to try something deliciously different this weekend? Try our Sweet Jamaican Jerk Gourmet Pizza Now!
#Packers announce signing of 1st round draft pick Nick Perry, just minutes before the start of rookie practice. All 8 picks are signed.
havent been on in a while ... :P but im so bored
That fail moment when you fail at doing handstands.
Speaking of zines: I overheard the head of special collections at U of Delaware, Tim Murray, mention an upcoming zine exhibit.
Ask your hostess on how to get started on your win prizes such as a free sake tasting, or better yet, a FREE private catering!
If you are coming late to event tonight pls tweet us at we will come down to let you in!
At the airport Listenin 2 G.Q. "Disco Freaks (Rock-Nights)" & The Jacksons "Off the Wall (*Live)" #DancePartyinMyMind lol *Everything
I'm in 100% man I have been since the 1st time you tweeted me to listen. I'm doing my best to help promote and will continue.
co to jest to całe omegle? ;D
yea! that's how we do!
I'm Going To Say It Again, Just Cause It Makes Me Feel Good. . . "Fuck You Bitch !! Yeah You Hoe !!" Lml
Hopefully. Motorhome has been sitting since summer, I'll find out Saturday if she's roadworthy still. Can I email you?
YessirRT : Great Rehearsal w/ my bro D.Read
Todays audition for Duets was a sham. Like seriously!
1. Lanes- disregard them.
Glad to hear that! I may be moving right across the street, looking at the apartment today!
I think "beer and whiskey drinking Texan" says it all lol
because that would be exactly his job - to monitor Facebook?
Look at those handsome boys!
Tired af! Can't wait till June 13th
Defenders #4 took me completely by surprise. It almost seems like an indie book how Fraction explores Doctor Strange.
I can't sleep...ugh!
Blanket on? Too hot. Blanket off? Too cold. One leg out? Perfect
Ha! Love this. RT : time to be painted with high heat copper paint?
haha you missed out, it's all gone
HAPPY NEW YEAR!! Why don't you come down and get a New Tattoo or Piercing to celebrate :) I promise it wont hurt that bad.
:o wow. That's so stupid! Why would she do that?!?
Your welcome Belle :) I'm always glad to brighten up your day! You always do it to mine! :-)
That's how I work too...:)
$5.00 Hennessy until 11:00pm. Lots of hot girls in the building..........So come get a stiff one........
Is this tweet for me? Not that I mind, it just seems out of the blue & a bit in media res. Or was I sleep tweeting to you?
Today doesn't suck. There will be sea turtles.
Ironically & appropriately HBO is advertising its new documentary abt obesity in the US, , on Diners, Drive-Ins & Dives.
As a trace of obedience, pay strict attention to the commands of God.
I'll have to have a sign into chat day, too. I just can't do both at once. TOO MUCH! My limited brain can't handle it.
thanks dude. Reid was very good.
where are you working? Good to hear from you!
Good call. We would happily take our lumps for that one.
This dude really just asked me "Cod-O or Meriweather" wonder if he works for #ESPN ? #Cotto schools #Mayweather in 7
you too!!!
Whoever becomes the new congressman for el paso.. All I ask is for good concerts, Kay thanks.
Loving DC so far!
i dont think i will be able to go tonight :(
I mean we might not even be full for the first game...or it could be crazy
hating ass people! Your dog is so fucking pretty.
I was wondering what Franklyn German did while a fish in 06.i know he's a free agent,and everybody knows the fishes bullpen woes
The bio project <<
I feel like if im applying to jobs in social media I should be able to put my Klout score and Foursquare mayorships on my resume.
I see things in my beer! And there good
State today & tomorrow! Let's bring home another state title girls!
nice! I'd talk with you more but you're always busy. Haha
horrible night. Going to bed.
I'm dealing the fact that my other twitter me is more popular. How is that possible?
I am a work in progress (who needs more sleep and less worry).
Heart broken 😢💔
IF YALL WANT AUSTINS COVERS.. GO ON SOUNDCLOUD AND SEARCH THE COVER YOU WANT AND IT SHOULD COME UP.. Download it(:!!
Just when I thought I've seen it all...
So much stuff annoys me nowadays.
dont fall for those vip ticket things its a spam and virus!
Time to watch #Jerseyshore on the DVR. yup,
what interview ?
I agree with Taylor 👍
the breed is dying, slowly but gradually lol
... On facebook, Is the Austin Cater one the real you? They said it was but they were mean... Haha
": I would love to see and on tour together again" or & Tech9 &
There's nothing like a game 7 in a professional sport. Let's go.
"All great achievements require time." – Maya Angelou
To coincide with , get ready for a special 2-day-only discount code to use on ShopToko. Coming your way at 1145 ET today!
We had a great open house tonight at the new Efroymson Center for Creative Writing at Butler. Our little MFA family has a home!
of course i did lol nd we r auditioning for season 8 but we gotta work hard u up for it
Others believing in you is nice but worthless if not matched by your own thought. ~ Scott Moore
Have no respect for the authority of others, for there are always contrary authorities to be found. ~ Bertrand Russell
Live Bands, Music, Videos & More www.iBand.me take a minute and sign up today!
When marketing your brand you need to study up on your target audience to develop a marketing message that will resonate with them.
8-Layer Torte with Chocolate Swiss Meringue Buttercream. popular in central Eurpoe. This torte was first created in 1887 in Hungary! $69.99
Would you mind sharing your thoughts with the Chicago Citizen for a story celebrating #DonnaSummer 's life?
Why does the postal service not raise rates on bulk mail? I get mail from credit cards and insurance cos daily. Bulk mail is too cheap.
IKR LoL I saw that too funny!!!
I still won't be on Twitter 4 awile. Got back out of Hospital next off to a Specialist. Lots of Pain an ODDLY Bleeding from my ears ☹ NITE
I met some of the API staff at UH &picked up the Hungary & Poland brochure, dreaming that I was still an undergrad :)
Thanks! Looking forward to seeing you soon!
It�s interesting to notice that a lot of the time homeless people have really well-trained and submissive #dogs!
The chef is hard at work! We just got a big catch of fresh fish in for tonight's menu specials. Don't miss out!
we're excited! Thanks for hosting us!
focus on your regulars , I'll jump on google and say, man I'll love to bust that , for a sweet price... Somebody will step up
Welcome back! :)
BTW, the the hell is poutine?
yes I do
I just get frustrated when people hate on a player, and then get ticked when they get hurt. Can't have it both ways.
The awkward moment when you say 'alright' about 40 times when your done talking to someone on the phone.
yes yes :)
Officially launching my youth program for the girls this week. Super excited!
I gotta re-do a video because of copy rights -_- -Proto
Looks like I'm going out tonight gonna get faded ha
Irvington, NY -- on the Hudson
Testing my new plumberry scent..WOW! it's BERRILICIOUS!!!!
dog in my area saved his family from a house fire....the entire family was saved. Doggie died, even though owner tried to save him :( :(
ase quack? :) RT Un pato (: RT : un que? RT Do you wanna buy a duck? ;D
Think Spring!
Happy Earth Day 2012 to #nzt saving the world through music, ideas and technology.
I really hate Matt Holliday.
Following back fam.
Nothing like driving in the truck belting Adele with Happy Friday to me!
well keep us posted sir
Watching #adventuretime instead of doing my homework,
TONIGHT! Singer-Pianist Tom Shaw performs at Max's Opera Cafe (aka Max's at the Opera) in San Francisco from 6-9pm.
You acciedentally send naughty pics and messages to your boss?
that's what's up.
First time at Fat Patty's .. what to get?!?!?!
#TheAvengers was beyond wonderful. Perfectly balanced, expertly executed & equal parts hilarious and inspiring. I am in love.
Of course!
Building a new game( poker pool) I would like you to be a Avatar you will have a lot of fun call me 5629229011
Biz op in Denton! We are expanding our network of sponsors! Contact us!
I would have so many problem with #oomf if I commented on there stupid tweets.
To ALL my tweeps!! Mia Joy Candles is wishing you a Happy Peter Rabbit Day.
"Renegade" makes me want to get a fast car.
M free bday Starbucks!
I believe the color is coming from winds on the front of the rain storm kicks up dirt into the atmosphere. That's my guess.
Thank you Practical Law Company for sponsoring the Nat'l TLMeet!
That awkward moment when a guy improvs his entire final project ..
Bad brush fire on Wakefield TPC near 12th hole. Spreading fast!!!!
I wish I would have seen this earlier!:(
Catching some rays pool side!
Talking about how great the Devils players' playoff beards are with my brother & dad. lmfao
Who hoooo . 1st place in the west. Here we go. sweet goal. Congratulations. Great game.
Oceans's 11 such a classic
off to nevada spca to donate cat condo and toys the cats don't use. if in the area check them out: www.nevadaspca.org
pick us pick us:)
yea and I'm still not use this thing LOL it's so weird haha
Academic publishing has embraced the e-journal, and the prospects for e-books also look promising: Give me an 'E'
yes. they can be eaten at any point during the day and they still have the same impact
The Future!!! Now I need to actually tweet.
Oh my #Packers :(
I am officially homeless Twitter world. Couch hopping, here I come.
I stole a key and took a car downtown where the lost boys meet, took a car downtown and I took what they offered me - to set me free.
look out rich, reggy might hire you.
Ah Great weekend. Now time to get ready for exams unfortunately
I almost feel like the Brewers didn't even make the playoffs...time for redemption.
Moving to California? I don't understand your question.
Twitter, You are so EFFIN AWESOME! #TEAMPORTLAND #TEAMFOLLOWBACK #USA #UK #RUSSIA #JAPAN #BRAZIL #AFRICA #JAMROCK all you sweet followers!
6500 Watt Generator
Flirting is fun, untill you get tounge tied around the one you want.
You wanna be the lady he invites to his house to meet his family ,not the one he invites to meet his bed .
Chapter 2012 Page 43 of 366 Cherishing this precious gift called life and making every day of it count.
There is also 'bad news' tonight - GOP vote continues to be down in these state races. Lack of excitement for lackluster candidates.
haha yep! It actually symbolizes life after death/eternal life!
Happy mother's day to the mother of and I love you all! :* &hearts;
Today feels like its gonna be boring
Dear young people!! If you in college!! STAY IN COLLEGE AND GRADUATE
Dinner w/ amazing, creative, brilliant and beautiful young women like my daughter & her friends...there is hope for the future!
RT : Waiting for Metro Comedy at Brightwood Bistro. This better be funny cuz nobody's here. I might order another dinner.
you make no sense, imbecile!
Get on out here! It's the most you can have. EVER. Like, seriously.
Caps are going to round two of the Stanley Cup Playoffs. Woohooo!!!!!
Nice! I am staying busy and it sounds like you are too!
Thanks for hanging out for a bit!
Summer LOVE Summer Love summer love..... ;)
When She just wont quit!
Dick #Lugar is a fine statesman, but when your fierce defenders are NY and DC oped pages instead of Indiana voters, it's probably time to go
We don't pity or cry for the death. we celebrate n honor their greatness and is a reminder of the path of our life we should pity or cry for
So if you have a client that needs fast, short-term financing or any client looking to finance, refinance, or recapitalize give me a call.
Be Encouraged!
After 2 days off, I'm ready to hit the trails.
what did she say?!!!!
thanks Boss!
thank you!!
: Do u know a home cook who makes great Cuban-style fried chicken? If so, email us at
I have thought about mrsdiggles, but bitchtech sounds so hardcore.
oh. Barracuda :)
Thank you for the free copy of "the year we left home", just received it n I'm looking forward to reading it :)
Welcome home! We're gosting a brunch Sun. if you want to come.
I dont own a cell phone -_-
MT MT If NYR+LA play for the Cup, NYR will have played against the lowest seeds possible: 8, 7+6 in East, 8 in West
Going through my recipes and finding some great cupcake ones for opening day!
Msg in like decc! It farr
A smile is a curve that sets everything straight. ~Anonymous
thats because it's all about winning!!!
"Sometimes the greatest journey is the distance between two people." -The Painted Veil
Why i am on my rant really 10 mill are u fucking kidding me
LOVE hearing about all the small Denver theater companies selling out shows! This town can and already does support the arts.
I'm not a douche chief..
Thnks, actually just sent you a DM
Hey titty :D
Did you know, that if you post a picture with duck lips, you'll die, as a lonely cat woman?
Everybody's gonna love today, love today, love today!
miss u in the 305!
Anyone have best practices or guidelines for implementing an institutional repository? We are just getting started with ours.
Sounds perfectly acceptable to me MT 25-35 pages a class, 50-60 a week for a 100-level social science course?
been good but we are all still tired from being out in the sun all day yesterday for a dog day at the baseball game
buy some cd's yo! - love eric and luke
Look for blue Ts. There might be parents/PTA in the stands w signs.
hookers at the Go pool woohoo. Oops another typo, hookas at the Go pool. Damn you Gin!
This made me LOL
If you get the chance to sit it out or dance, I hope you'll dance!
I really wish would notice me:(
Green mud masking like an 80s makeover movie sequence. What would be the theme song?
ur not funny!
go to bed
I wish I still have hgtv
I CAN'T WAIT TILL YOUR LA CONCERT!!!!! IM SO EXCITED!! I HOPE I'LL GET TO MEET YOU!!!!
Boston has to be the only NCAA site permitted to use a parquet floor? All others normal straight forward.
have fun Nate .
your so nice to other people ILOVEYOUVERYMUCH<3<3
You go to crossfit ????
great point Mike
I'm. So. Tired.
smh same ol same ol
will keep trying. Anyway tweet you later. Have a great day~BAMM.
I miss you too. :))) Sorry for not on in a while, im totally busy with exams. -.-"
Happy Birthday to !
It took Duffy 4.1 innings to reach 100 pitches. Ugh. Hard to "protect" a good young arm when they throw 20+ pitches an inning.
Bees keep flying into my window. I'm scared. I feel like it's a coordinated effort.
Great picture how are you sir?
Was using your password plugin, but after version 4 it isn't working. Using Multisite. Just kicks me back to login.
Meetings today!! :)
am i? thanks :)
Today is going to be a beautiful and productive day.
During A “Hypno-Therapy” Session I Found Out That In A Past Life I Was “Also” Steve Matthew Butynes…
Thinking of starting a petition to stop teaching students to overanalyze fashion ads...
Aye! Happy as hell! Lmfao!
BIG THINGS POPPIN!
Getting ready for church tonight @ #KIVCC Phoenix it's going to be off the chain hope to see you there.
": got it!" Great hope you enjoy!
I will not go back 2... when health ins cos had unchecked power 2 cancel your policy, deny your coverage, charge women differently than men
Good Friday morning!!! It's such a beautiful Fall morning. The leaves have all changed colors and are falling, perfect for Thanksgiving! :)
4 spots left! Contact me or if you are interested in joining a temporary paralegal project. We'll need to interview you …
MitchBenn so Mitch let us know, what distracted you in a mens toliet? LOL
american reunion funniest movie ive seen in years way to kill it
you suck you cant beat big show lol you took the easy way out lmao
I feel you on this! A good friend of mine who is gay, single and lonely is against gay marriage. Pisses me off!
tell me what you think about #Macapp? Come on. Don't be shy.
Nice shout out from in Thank You Economy! Love that I've been a Wufoo advocate before it was cool :)
fam my daddy just said "in the projects killin roaches at the same damn time" 😒👎
Are you going on the air to report?
I remember my momz used to call to say she was watchin Golden Girls & Good Times :')
really want the new ipad.
Not every inch/second of a movement needs to be streamed/filmed/photographed for actual transparency to be attained.
u catch it, you keep it
Happy Easter to Everyone !
I know I said I would be on more ad I didnt get on :O And I'm honestly sorry you guys :o
damn these
After work social tonight 5$ selected pints from 4-7pm.
Van Update: We now only listen to anarchist bands in the van.
Follow , or I'll eat you.
Anyone seen my invisible pants?
Slow down, son, you're killin' 'em! How'd you end up doing in your future hometown?
Thanks for the RT Love your store!
U Got It! RT Heyo Volcano Girl! Great work preventing #Carmageddon Now...how about fixing that debt ceiling!
Watching the breakfast club. . . i loove this movie(:
So thinking Cozumel, Mexico will be a delicious vacation <3
's book "Responsive Web Design with HTML5 and CSS3" is now available on It looks good.
haha he's been letting that beast go untamed all season
Follllllowwww me please
Stressing out? We've got your gift needs covered. Fresh cut flowers, gourmet gifts, fresh baked cookies; all occasions. www.FreeXpedia.com
You gotta come scoop em
"It's actually a concrete truck, not a cement truck." -another know-it-all statement to put in my back pocket, thanks to writing kids books.
The Georgia game is gonna be a tight one
I learn something new every day. I love it when I learn new stuff about my friends. Hugs and Happy Anniversary to you both!
Thank you Tiffanie! Would love to meet you! :)
I hope B Diddy is ok
To everyone that saw Miss Dia @ NWD - Wow! What a performance. NEXT SHOW = APRIL 8TH. We are excited for our features through this year.
I'm on my way to the Chi for a few days...fwm...
Send that to me RT : yall tune into Remix of "sure thing" up next! l
After an hour and a half rain delay RT : look at this crowd at the Prog!
Goodnight Twitter. God bless. Joel 3:10!
have been trying to log in forever did all the security & still no luck no one to return info on this issue
If I could "like" this tweet, I would!
ok sweet. I'm sure we can find a local starbucks :)
Also, did you hear that is keynoting? #authorspeak #yahoo!
that was an AWESOME goal
RT : Following #ebksmt, also follow for great Twitter coverage! (TY!)
Off to a theater workshop that I've been invited to. Then I'm heading to the 45th Str Theater to perform "Balm in Gilead" again at 8pm! Yay!
aww dont worry kid im here for you okaai.(:
floor+coka-cola+twitter = working on a world history map and journal on Ponce De Leon...he never got a drink form that fountain in tampa D:
Alot of females ask me if im from Miami..
Fml! Mad hot in this room
How does the Obama administration know that Romney would not have killed Bin Laden. O supporters thought he would be more liberal
you're ALMOST there! Keep your eye on the light at the end of the tunnel whenever you feel like punching someone ;)
Shemar Moore is the most beautiful man on this earth lol I Cant get enough of him
Waiting on UPS as the Distortion promotional postcard/fliers arrive today!!
Just keep punching away. Go the distance.
Yours fucking bitch. Why do you talk to me like that?
Fierce and love, Tyra.
RT : Ball so hard mfukas wanna find me
WHY AREN'T YOU TWEETING ME ANYMORE SIS?
I unscrewed all but one lightbulb in our bathrooms to make everyone look better, unfortunately, I now only have half my eyebrow!
The changes in Astrologilcal signs is something that astronomers have known about for decades. So, why all the News now??? Ask the News???
o ok"_
probably why they were friends they were always drunk lol
Huh, that's sounds a little familiar. Im pretty sure I said the same thing awhile back
Taylor: In media ownership, must look at markets & see what's appealing, e.g. Oprah could own b'cast, but went cable instead.
Welcome to and all new tweeps! We have a lot planned for 2012 - now adjusting schedules. Will update soon. :)
Thats great! I am excited for Christmas as well, now if I could not be sick LOL. Hope you are well :)
Good chatting with you too!
lol! too funny (and true)!
It was an epic thermal.
There is much gym-going in your near future I predict
I wonder what would happen if i ran away, would anyone see that i'm gone?
It&#39;s all about style
Yes and yes! RT : Focus on Your Strength ~ Delegate the rest to Others says on
I feel like I'm forgetting something since I'm not taking anything to school with me today...
cant wait for universal with the friends tomarro :)
Hardly able to hold my eyes open
Tomorrow's message completes Pastor Jeske's Lenten series "Watch With Me". Not sure where to watch locally? Find out here...
8 pages so far means I can sleep now and have time to write a few more bright and early tomorrow.
Nigga be using coupons and shit
"Free Alarm" is the first lie many alarm companies will tell you. Why would you buy security from someone who started out by lying to you?
Puck drops tonight on a brand new hockey season! Go pens!
It's been a pleasure getting to know you this season... I'm already looking forward to 2012...
Lyons to Arizona. Mind the Tucson tumbleweed. And despair.
Good Morning! Getting ready for class. Thank you God for waking up this morning you didn't have to but you did. I am claiming success today.
the first band was great. They're called Automagik. The we're really fun
what you know about that cuz? lol
I side with your argument on the matter 100%. It's stupid. Whether it be SC2 or COD, I talk like a sailor and enjoy it.
i have to babysit friday and saturday night? well there goes my weekend.
EXACTLY! Do ppl study history, I mean recent history like Iraq! For this reason I back Kaddafi!
OUP: our work with #consortia has been asking for discounts for independent buyers
yes please
up up down down left right left right b a select start
lmao someone should tweet something random and put "I'm not racist" at the end
y u no #httq?
"but she drank like a toilet"
WE GOT THIS! LOVE YOU LIZ! YOU'RE AMAZING AND YOU DESERVE THE BEST! <3 GOODNIGHT GIRL!
got some luncheon thing
i can hear it from here....
don't you need expressed written consent from MLB? :D
it would be the best birthday ever if you wished me a happy birthday! (:
Cool! Thanks! Well we don't have any connections out there but I'm sure there are some. I'll post a tweet :)
Thrilled to have FULL PAGE article on Over 40 Females - thank-you for your support!
where's your facebook?
a fuckin' retard.
Today we ask social media prof , has Facebook already peaked? Then on challenging Warren's Democratic nomination
yo boi is getting ready for his party this saturday at th TASTE ent 6331 s LOWE ladies showtime starts at 11:30... hit for all info K.L.E.O.
OMG YES OMG OMG OMG IM SO HAPPY OMFGG YESS <333333
New Avi of Tika and she will be in the building tonight & plus 20 other beautiful dancers..... So stop by........
Some people just get on my nerves
stay up bro
I ain't got shit to do except enjoy life
Thanks for bringing the food today!
Goodmorning Everyone... Tomorrow is the day! The #FarragutNorth curtain rises for Black Lab #Theatre at
#RunChat Q1) Mostly weights, yoga, biking and swimming.
Me too. It's sad. Weeks are too short.
What's up with Lamar?
dont jinx it
Facebook acquires Instagram!... hahahaha and you thought Android users were bad! Bwahahahahaha
We can change our beliefs and practices.
Trapped in my hotel in Maine. Going outside to check on if the world is a skating rink or a puddle. Hoping for puddle.
#Ravens all the way. Strong leadership all around, a promising future and just enough history of which to be proud.
oh okay. I will DM you!
gracias. Happy Valentine's Day to you!
Live music at Varsity Bar! Mike Dubose, Don Harvey and Jansen Hawkins!! Music starts at 6pm, $3.75 Study Breaks (Jager shot & Lonestar pint)
There isn't a day that goes by that I don't miss BD's Mongolian Grill.
When I walk into a business with Fox News on in the background, it feels like I've gotten into my car w/ a serial killer in the back seat.
Are you at the Red Hot Chili Peppers show right now? if so I hate you.
I love u to stay strong and tell danica I will be praying and I will tlk to her tomar
a suitable guitar for a soon-to-be legend ;) It's gorgeous!
Why isn't Thomas Robinson wearing pantyhose on his arms tonight?
Good job #Rihanna ! Set a good example for all young women and men by going right back to the person who beats you.
well probly going to put a vid up cause im bored and practicing so why not-Tamya:P
Thanks we are too. We'll have a live report on
Sometimes you just have to laugh...
thanks honey!
OMG HAPPENING NOW!!!!!!!
maybe we'll get new uni's for every game like Oregon does!
Ah thx,u made my day:) : Happy Valentine's 2 my fav FL Tweeps!
HUGE Christmas sale going on plus we have tons of awesome new items. Check it out! www.nightowlmerch.com
It supposedly measure your social networking influence. I only look at it every once in a while for a chuckle.
What's a life with no fun please don't be so ashame
Going to be updating tonight about teen hoot ! Follow also :) - Lydia
followed. Thanks Mel! Nice to meet you Missy.
RT : RT : Black people hate on another black person wit money more than anyone else
No promo (de facto promo) but Sir Chuck is clearly incentivized to lose weight by being paid exorbitantly to do so. Poss. #archevore model??
Your everything to me <3 Your so amazing :)
Riley really cranky tonight though im nt gne hve this tonight....
Help someone in need, you will have great blessings ahead.......
Santa Clarita I'm en route...hope you're ready!!!!
Family first
“: at least your not hungry. road food is always good. be safe” so far, so greasy! Lol but delicious:)
just search it. Lol
Money make ha wet, Gon' & cut the check (Future VC)
my past has literally fucked me up so much.
Thanks Madison! :)
Ed Hardy and douchebaggery not dead in Vegas.
you inspired me. I love you ;)
and i ment to say *older*
bottom I like the web better
yes, yes, yes we do
#NW "Dave Chappelle's Block Party. Staring Dave Chappelle, #CentralStateUniversity, #IMM, BEST MOMENT OF MY LIFE!!!
looovvved the popcorn! Also got the tempura which was perfectly cooked. Broccoli rabe tempura..who knew?
I love texting him(:
Got Microsoft Vista. It wants me to rate my own files? Files I wrote? Um...yeah....five stars for Annelisa!
now now, no need to get snarky. what else am i to do in between reps!?
same here but it dead down here
I mean licensines that wouldn't matter
2 weeks until Valentines Day! Show that special someone you REALLY love them with a Shorty's Gift Card!
this philo of lack vs life, anti theory vs do elseways is ridiculous--as if the T-thing that IS without the not that makes it T is Thing.
Had my 3 most influential profs and all sitting in front next to each other. Fantastic.
You sound like you are well prepared.
Just had my 1st appearance as Auditor before a legislative cmte. Said an 8.4% cut hurts, but I won't use it as an excuse not to do the job.
It's more like a time out...yesterday was not a good day for me, Sarai.
sounds like a plan!
Proud to be a volunteer! RT : Huge party, great weather, amazing game. Indy nails it.
": Know your gear, trust your ear" << that's IT in a nutshell.
must have been Plouffe.
Nevertheless, it has some negative impact on a woman’s self-image and self-confidence
I don't care what ur mom says, you are not special and/or unique. You are just like every other glitter wearing, gaga listening faggot here
"Do stuffed animals have feeling?" -
Love you Sis, praying a safe return; can't wait to see ya on Monday bright and early, getting back to what I love to do w/Glue:)
Terrence Graham @ #ccid2012 is right on. Evaluate your international program on campus. Are we a 6? I think so!
seriously. I'm letting GMail take over for me--hoping I don't miss something important, but I can't deal with the volume.
i LOVE new found glory. like i forgot just how much i loved them. i remember when they were all i listened to in 5th grade.
true but we signed him for only 2 years so maybe TT is gonna draft a center and have Saturday groom him for his replacement
UGH I JUST NEED TO STICK TO JUSTIN. LIKE TF WHY AM I STARTING TO LIKE GUYS FROM MY SCHOOL. THIS AINT COOLFJGHFGSDG
I know I'm not a player but I can be a gentle-man.
Project Trick- -into-becoming-a-plus-size-model is going according to plan.
Welcome back to the Bay Boss...Great day to be here!
Finally got his number :D . I meet up with him today
lol he the one going crazy
Awww, hope the little guy feels better soon! It's heartbreaking knowing there's little you can do to get him better faster
Nice to meet you as well. Cool stuff you're doing!
that's butt. Lol
21st century book clubs with and Beatrice Gerrish. Want to do next year..love for reviewing!
#IRA2012 attendees-if you're concerned about keeping kids safe online or teaching kids tech, find & meet ZillyDilly creator !
Proverbs 27:6Proverbs 27:6 Faithful [are] the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy [are] deceitful.
Everything is good in its season 鬼も十八番茶も出花
I hope you are kid free.
Make that *UIe (-:
THANKS, have a powerful 1!
I just want to thank everybody who supports me and supports my DJing.. I wouldn't be where I am today if it wasn't for all of you!
Imma paint the city red w/ this one.
this message was not sent from me. It was sent from this twitter account: :t.co/ULK1mg3. some how they got into my account, and are
#IHatePeopleWho act like freaking kids! Grow up!
Heading to the East Coast tonight for Graduation Weekend Extravaganza 2012. Way to make me feel old Carly Sacks and Melissa Roth.
Send me an email and I'll walk you through it.
I wonder what kind of beer Philadelphia will be coming up with when the Devils put them out of their misery 2morrow...
love it. not really as descriptive as 101, but it'll do.
Banging headache 😣👎
... And the next pipe that breaks may cause me to go Caddyshack on this whole mess.
Gettin my hair did :-) thanks roomie! You're the best hair stylist!
Very excited that a has opened on Temple's campus. Waffles for all!
Live your dreams. Never wake up!
HAHA, Barack is hilarious!!! He said soccer is just like the NBA ... only for slow, unathletic white people with zero hand-eye coordination!
Leapfrog eyes LeapPad app market, defend turf vs. Android - CNET
I offer yellows to anyone nearby. Usually throw away plenty.
as always, thanks kate! :)
Finally watching #glee!!!!!!
where the fsd link at?
Now if you were in Kentucky tonight I would be cooking that dinner for you and you would be opening that bottle !! Just saying
Details?...who needs details? We take you at your word...well, some of us do, anyways. :)
Nothing Much, How R U This Morning?
Ah! Finally a little sunshine this morning at Ally B Studio :)
happy birthday to my boyfran !!!!!!!! lovez ya
We learned a lot too. It was great meeting you. John C.
Life loves to be taken by the lapel and told: "I am with you kid. Let's go." ~Maya Angelou
Great so far! How's yours?
and Karl Pilkington in a new BBC show involving travel. Make it happen, BBC. You're welcome.
Lunch itinerary: Jersey Mikes, and the out to buy some MAN SOCKS for
cool>>>homework some times sucks but what can we do about it
We don't have an exact date yet, but we're thinking May!
My concert location posted to my wall
you'll be the first person I tell belie dat!
He was crashing the box and I'm assuming he was just taking an extra few yards to stay on his feet and not slip on the grass.
Follow me, I follow you :)
Eroma = Erotic+Romantic! does it again. $.99 Daily Deal for #Kindle and #Nook! Get it on sale today before it goes back $4.99!
RT - -New England Patriots all day baby!- :)
So, now you should pay it forward and help your followers out. :)
Wilton Simpson Q1 total is $29,325. Looks as if he and John Legg will be in a highly-priced and bloody battle for whatever Senate seat.
I Miss You by Blink 182 >
Thanks for responding. Email me at and I'll send you some details.
Ikea right? Thats where we picked up Lyla.
I hate that they give handicap passes to people just for being fat. Aren't those the people that actually need the extra walking?!?
Thanks for the memories. Once a Tiger, always a Tiger. Best of luck Will!
Follow and because they're spreading the good word.
I've never seen someone from a significant others family try to keep people together.
#scarymovierulestoliveby if a pet acts weird, pack up all your shit and leave right away. Don't ask "Is something wrong?" Assume it is!
Yes Sir
Chillin like a villain.
Have we really fallen so far in society that Bristol Palin is allowed to make social commentary?
Thanks for the connection
Finally home. Now to watch the end of the game and pick some new songs to learn. Suggestions?
looking for hot music artist in losangeles,artist make sure you follow us on twitter
Ha, right. I figured you would have been down here from Cleveland before. Welcome back! I promise no football comments.
There is an Irish reality golf show? How am I only hearing about this now!
re: adele ME TOO!!!
House Hunters, you have sucked me in again.
Shot the 20 year reunion for the 1992 superbowl champion cowboys.
We'd LOVE for you to play ! It's a unique event in a lovely part of the state. Plus, it benefits young MN musicians!
We"re drinking the best beers ever in Austin, TX.
The great danger for most lies NOT in setting our aim 2 high & falling short; but in setting our aim TOO low, & achieving our mark. ~M.B.~
Thank you and wow, what an episode! We loved Sherlock tonight. :)
well that would explain it's elusiveness when searching. Now I'm even more curious. ;)
March Madness is coming soon and we will be giving away a Free Trip for 2 to Vegas for 5 days and 4 nights - Watch for details on how to WIN
Teens Volunteer @ Old Colorado City Library this Sat. at 3. Teen Advisory meeting
I love Tom Brady
I need more followers anybody wanna help
thanks for kill'n the shit
Wise and mature people do not make excuses! They always find ways to reach their goals!
this girls description is LOADING???? cannot wait to sit down and read it.
Yeah. Also, while Rachel Berry is the main character if a TV show, she is not the main character of that high school. Bullshit.
Rolex On My Risk Cost A Camaro Yeah That Double S
good thing u spent all that $$ on ink and not bettering your immediate future -_- #nice$management LoL
Back to the money I go rise and grind tomorrow then cook finger when I get off
We are entering hurricane season. Is your company prepared?
Sharing one tooth brush for your whole family
confusing dance numbers cause I'm so nervous
The Avengers.. AMAZING.
Jam put a much better effort in the third and cut their deficit to just four points to end the third (73-69)
Who saw #full moon rising last night? A giant gold coin, gleaming yellow. I crossed a street & there it was, hovering -huge- at the horizon.
...because when i fall i fall hard.
Enjoying a nice, quiet evening with the fam!
Would love to hear others' thoughts on this. " Q4 How do you validate/measure offline word-of-mouth and engagement? #pr20chat"
Brother in law and family safe although tornado hit their sub near Ulrich street Dexter MI Praise God for hand of protection!
My dream is to play The Big Show in a Big Show biopic.
Facing Foreclosure And Need Assistance With A Short Sale We Can Help. www.newbridgehomeloans.com
Probably just hasn't been any email yet. Give me 5 minutes & I bet I can find something nefarious going on :)
i am on twitter still
hey :) what's up
can't bend my pointer finger.
#dolphins D#
Love it!!! RT : The writers of Modern Family are genius. This show never ceases to amaze me!
is the cutest guy ever! I wish he would follow me. THATS MY GOAL FOR TODAY! ...It's just one click!!:Dplease! 18
BUG Report: great offerings from all our friends. Coincidence? I think not. Haymarket & metro & finch & 5 rabbit!
And I'm glad we don't "party."
I want to start playing the violin again.
Thank you Jesse! And thank you #DALIENS! We appreciate all the support! Keep watching and sharing
hahaha. I have moves like jagger. Wait no... what are the moves of jagger?
Smashing Pumpkins added to MFNW, That just threw a wrench in my whole schedule.
absolutely, please email us
“: Be prepared for Carb Day again this year. 🍻” I can't wait!
Any experts on using WP_OSC plugin to integrate OS Commerce into Wordpress blog? I could use some help.
me and my litte sister throwing fruit loops in the air and catching them in your mouth instead of doing homework. we cool.
I desperately need a #JohnCusack impersonator to call my daughter on her birthday. I think she'd fall over on her cake!
The battle of the seller dwellers!
There should be a rule....you cannot get a new smartphone until your current one is no longer sold.
i'm gonna put it out there right now... your customer service SUCKS ASS!! it's more like customer NO SERVICE!! JUST SAYIN!!!
Watching a wonderful dance company but this dude dancing is like half way naked...I mean come on
Thank you Marla!
Kudos to the volunteers working the #SuperBowl. Everyone of them has been exceedingly nice and are really giving #Indy a good name!
Sorry all you Norv haters. Amazing what he can do with an all most healthy team. He beat what many consider the best team in the AFC.
does know look at what he retweeted
The man giving me a pedicure said he will send 100 egg rolls to my house if let him go on a date with my best friend
wants to go out tonight.
A 4:00 appointment just opened up if anybody wants it. Send me a text @ (404) 771-0164.
Ibarguen Miami defies corporate control. Debate constant, discover different points of view: prepare to let go!
Steve Novak is the man
"When one tugs at a single thing in nature, he finds it attached to the rest of the world." -John Muir. Rest well, dear yogis.
great show!!! In quintessence one of my favs!!!
Yes I did- I created the BOOM! team for my friends/coworkers. Good luck!
you have such a amazing voice! Great job!
John Brenkus of ESPN's Sport Science is on Grounds today, Dec. 3. All are invited to his 4:00 talk in Room 204, Physics Building.
"You must stay drunk on writing so reality cannot destroy you." ~Ray Bradbury
follow me please
(Via ) You so Lucky! How many beers DID you have? -Zero. Guess I should start.
Totally. We are in the middle of The Wire. So we'll probably finish that up and then ax Netflix totally
I don't care what the calendar says, I hereby prociam it to be Friday! Let's make it happen! Drink and apps specials start in 30!
re all attractive.
More info?
I shall teach you 😏
Good FRIDAY morning! Isn't it crazy how time flies so fast? It is already the middle of April!
haahaa dey better den olive garden
I guess it's about dual improvement then. Good question!
Is getting in trouble (not involving the BIG 3) with the law StraightEdge? <Read it, Learn it, Live it>...<XXXBeStraightEdgeXXX>
Coffee party!
Apparently is the man!
11 children needs surgery and can help them. I just sent my donation to this amazing humanitarian. Love that guy!
Some people I like better when I don't know them
Agreed re Thur-Sat. sought + incorporated community feedback in the planning process.
Watching American Horror Story. There's no frickin' way I'd watch this if I were alone!
RT : RT : Rep Morrow: some calls & emails to lawmakers on stadium have "crossed the line". Urges people to be...
that's interesting, Jen.
2 11-game winning streaks this year...is finally going to give the #SPURS the props they deserve and have earned?
What song do you suggest Redrock Saloon plays?
i mean Celine Dion sent all your favs into cardiac arrest way back in 1997
I know it effin blows. He had to park right in front of our driveway. Just bad luck.
GOD I'M RIGHT HERE.
Thank you :)
How long into producing did you start noticing your own "sound"? (da funkiness) Are you a fast learner? Genius in school?
What are you doing on GOD's time today?
no one has swagga like us
so what are you getting today?
what time do you work tomorrow
' youre on drugs & irrelevant if you think Herman Cain Winning Florida Straw Poll By Huge Margin is headline of moment...
Thanks to those who support me. It won't and don't go unoticed. Goodnight.
Only 33% of consumers trust banner ads. John Paton, CEO digital first media.
Something is better than nothing
I loved that! Almost as good as a peanut butter, spinach, tomato, chinese toy sandwhich!
I'm finally back in Jersey, it was amazing being a part of the International Beauty Show, I would definitely do it again. :)
Hey there! How is Salem Mass in October? I figure you have the inside scoop :)
Of course
what's his twitter?!
Love is like a rumor, everyone talks about it, But no one truly knows.
My brother: pardon my nuts. *continues to walk around naked*
I Had a dream that all my teeth had visible cavities! what a nightmare!
Next on the to do list: replace with Joe Benanati.
Made mailbox labels, cleaned laundry room & fitness room, typed, walked a pup, went to store, ordered cleaning supplies ...
Having way to much fun getting people with my new fav toy.
So it was Jerry Tipton's 10th year at the Herald Leader?
So it seems like is ignoring me, his own family... That's ok, I'll go get some hot dogs with Hunter.
I'm asking if their pants run big because the thing is, I'm an enormous size 2.
BOYS SWIMMING: Wilson extends Moore reign - Long Beach Press-Telegram
we now get Whole Living & Everyday Food thanks to :)
I'm leaning that way too, but wonder if there's room for cultural importance of the game. Some play because they love it.
you know it. Go
my little #script has been sent off! Time for some pie!
Haha am I being to loud.
Happy Freedom Day!
ok I have never heard those two films at all!! Did you make them up? Lol
“: :(”I feel the same right now lmao
actually i co own it..haha..:D
My little cousin got his first girlfriend. Time goes by so fast. It was just yesterday when I remember a little baby throwing up on me.
Because Dwayne Wade is precious.
is anyone watching x factor? What is up with rihannas long nasty nails.......EEEEEEWWWWW!
Is it 4:00 yet? Time to leave work n go fishn
Lithuanian double duty today: V-16 Latin Mass + dance class in Baltimore.
Canopy 600-Thread Count Cotton Sheet SheetQueen Retail 5988 - sheet sets queen
My 5 yr old son is flabbergasted that a soccer match can end in a tie. "that doesn't make sense."
probably easier to clean than walls
Thanks for the retweet! Are you part of
What broad got star struck by standing next to last night - cause he was wearing a Wisconsin t-shirt? This one.
Japanese officials consider burying reactors in soil.
text me!
What? Wounding isn't the point of #SpyMaster? But I'm SO good at it....
o ok lol
they just opened at Chipolte Grill a couple of miles from my house...
Nothing wrong with change.
Kicked out before midnight. Baby girl, you almost made it.
They fixed my laptop! I can stop writing blog posts on my Kindle now!
Our shrimp & grits TV Dinner will be served with garlic spinach, fried okra, cole slaw, and coffee cake for dessert. Starting this Thursday!
please follow my new account ! i'll follow back!
Our strawberries are just turning red. Growing them at home since they have one of highest levels of pesticides when bought at the store!
#IF11 closing session: what if #sustainability only came with AND not BUT or IF
Alligator Attack!
Dear , There should be a law that 2 teams I like CAN NOT play each other ergo VS
#yobitv Yo what up Doe? Joshua and Danielle and Jen And Jess
Watching #tokillamockingbird with my 11yr old.
Thank you for all the birthday wishes today!
The Ring Pop commercial is so
Love ya back :) <3
Im hungry and the only thing i have near me is candy
Matt Cain came to Mission to eat tacos! Sí, #raza. And just 2 days after that, he made that masterpiece of pitching against the
Jose, thanks for reminding me about what's going on in our educational system.
My favorite part about Hanging with Friends is knowing everyones sleep scheds
Thanks girl! I'm excited. :D
miss you, you gorgeous hunnie ya! the rest of the hunnies miss ya too! x
:) Followed u Ryan! X
When something works you work it hard!
#Florio #exhib #Burma #portraits #Chelsea #NY thanks Mikey! Wish you were in NY for the party! H & Flo x
landlord found it in basement & threw it out:-( Now he knows the cause of a 300% water bill from months back.
I need NBC to "accidently" mute Pierre's microphone.
I love animals and have a great music catalogue from Memphis ck us out.
I agree with you on that - there can Always be more fashion! :) Which gown was your favorite?
fuck is that?
Thank you for your vote! “: Just voted for for mayor of Baltimore”
well then, i see how it is (;
#YouGetMajorPointsIf you type in the right cheat code
agree on all counts.
It got leaked and it's on YouTube!
He chk raises to 8700 and has about 14k behind. I wasn't happy about it but put him all in and he had KT.
texts me all DAY and all NIGHT. Love her
RT : "Whenever you find yourself on the side of the majority, it is time to pause and reflect." - Mark Twain. Plz RT
Of course! Email me the info & Ill get it in the right hands,
#NickiNewAlbum Why'd u decide to put interview on album?
balanced breathing, inspire and expire is equal
Nice. :) Congrats.
: RT : Tonight on The Best Show: will be stopping by! 8-11 PM EST wfmu.org! RT this!
Nope. W.E.B Dubois.
I'm so sore from ballet and all those back and split stretches and feet and knee over my head
Our first event of #HackingEdu is here! See you tonight at ! Thanks for co-hosting this event with us !
So I went to Yahoo Answers asking what could be wrong with me and I got completely irrelevant answers...
Today in class: slaughterhouses, coal mining, pirated software, oil spills, shrimpin', Hitler & the Battle of San Pietro...
You know, Canada is home to some great wildlife, and Calgary is nice this time of year.
“: Metta World Piece Of Shit” how do I convey a "no" head shake on this?
Happy New Year and thanks for the shout out! :)
Traffic makes me sad...
WHY DO ONE DIRECTIONERS KEEP FOLLOWING ME! THE BAND IS GARBAGE! BACKSTREET BOYS IS THE ONLY BOY BAND FOR ME!
I'm always amazed at the bravery of the participants!
Don't think he cares were that goes. Desperate shot by a team down by two.
Wow, look how many followers we have, great job hunters and retweeters! For all the newbies, we are going to recap how this contest works.
GodBless u've touched so many. Grateful 4 happiness ur music has brought me Only greatness in store 4 next 15.
*updating status on facebook* oh *cancel* can't write that. family will see. #TSS -_-
Um has anyone else seen the new York Peppermint Patty commercial? Wow.
you're gonna live tomorrow, if you don't die today.
Promise yourself to live your life as a revolution and not just a process of evolution
Noice!!! Did you like the Vipe?
What is going on w/ TYT site? Where's the show?
S/o to check out his new joint
Good morning Chicago! 70 degrees, yes!
Will have to keep that in mind in future playground designs in the Caribbean.
The AFP one? The client has gone radio silent, ironically I just emailed them this morning to see what's up.
Well there's multiple.I'm going to be doing a couple of serious pencil drawings of actual people and need your help locating pix
Miami Dolphins undrafted free agents sign deals
I can RT : RT RT IF YOU THINK YOU CAN BEAT ME IN A FIGHT
Ok thanks
On slavery L said: The fight must go on. The cause of civil liberty must not be surrendered at the end of one or even one hundred defeats.
#whitepeoplehobbies Calling the cops.. #BlackPeopleHobbies Running..
Getting ready to have have an educational and enlightening night. A study of intoxication is about to commence. Let's start the tests..
well there was the 2nd severe weather warning in the last half hour on freaking out yet?
So my Spanish final might just be on verbs
David Batista offered a role in the film "Black Hole" from the series "The Chronicles of Riddick" studio Universal Pictures
RT : We care for any type of pet you may have including dogs, cats, fish, birds, rats, ferrets, and any other pets you may own
Ready to start recording again.
Headed to nelson's to ride again. . Jammin some dead boys in the truck. The band, not dead little kids.
hey I met u at playlist live in florida in march but u proboly don't remember me. Well I just wanted to say hi! Follow me??
It has just been discovered by a chic in the salon with me that I have a son by Trick Daddy...101 Question!!!
": Bodemeister did run great, but if that race goes 10 more yards he finishes out of the money."10 yds less and he's a champ.
Your experience is what differentiates you from your competitors.
Wade <--my beast last name :3 "aly wade" ahh yeah
really? Who scored 8 points in the finals last yr? Baby bron bron did
my brothers b-day tommorow help me wat should i get him??:)
this has been bothering me since the show started! Why do I keep saying "but you killed Patrick Swayze though"?
My #gym membership has offically become an expensive key chain. I get home and think "gym time" but my body says "#food and sleep."
presenting teen award for
Thanks for making this day even more incredible for me than it already was going to be!
It's sad because you really were the best friend I ever had.
Goodnight twitter, followers, non followers, oh and future followers! :D
some of these women too they both can suck my toe knuckles lmao
We open at 8am on Black Friday! 20-25% off all jewelry merchandise!
Why the fuck did everyone blow my phone up at 7am?
That's an excellent idea...like an 80s prostitute spare bedroom or something. That would be perfect.
Hey all! Sorry...I just got home from the Nobel Peace Laureate summit. CPS students played a big role today!
Having an awesome time at Woofstock at Suwanee Park with Mom, Dad, and our dog, Libbie
go follow a sexy beast she's kind of amazing ;)
Everything is stupid.
he is, at least, not inactive. But certainly not as active as he was in the 1990s. Still at same address.
Andrew Bynum = Brian Fellows
I feel like the weather this summers gonna SUCK.
so the other day i saw a girl
We do the hard, unseen work of perpetuating Western Civilization. Hate a teacher if u want, but #LosAngeles is not burning 2nite.
I Wanna Bitch To Give Me Neck Like Pooh Bear!
Congrats on making varsity!! Have you thought about playing in college? Many opportunities for scholarships!
You are very welcome! Happy to share with other hard-working
nice to see u sticking around town for the weekend! Enjoy the sights sounds of da SD!
Omg! Craving DQ now. Must stop by before I go home. :)
that would be great, thanks!
hush up she killin me
hello MDMH! miss u
Who's your favorite contestant?!
Gonna be a god weekend.
I swear every time I am on any set. I freeze my balls off. Looking for them as we speak
Simmons also expecting to follow up in integrated practice areas such as pipelines to employment, caring adults/mentoring.
I am too. It's pretty. And we have no choice living in WI. Gotta make the most of it!
Gas prices to go down
#FemalesOutHereShapedLike 10 in the face and damn THICK in the waist.
I havent talked to or in like forever.!:o
Half white but don't think I got a klu klux pass, when I'm up in the V police be fuckin wit me
uh uh nor I, of course.
He who laughs last thinks slowest.
It doesn't matter who you are, where you come from. The ability to triumph begins with you. Always. ...Oprah Winfrey
haha you can actually change the sound now :)
Who's ready for To come Home? RT.
With my bro , tomorrow is his birthday party! So happy.. :)))
I hope the girls down the hall are at least hot, because judging by the daily smoke detector alarms, they're too stupid to cook.
#pathic when people start following you for a follow back then they unfollow you until u notice there sneaky game.
if its any consolation to you....I lost my car and was wandering outside looking for it for 15 minutes like a creep
yes they are! But not this week because of the summit :/ trying to rent a studio out tho!
Late breakfast of venison chops & chilaquiles...
RT : Brittle nails, hair loss? Eat eggs & walnuts for Biotin, fatty fish for Omega-3, spinach & kale for Vitamin A
I can't wait for Tuesday.
#AT&T is looking for a project manager for cool mobility projects in Atlanta. DM/email me if interested.
Carter was cleaning up Nixons/ Ford mess. RR also raised the debt ceiling 17 times!
Man wtf I get bull at this time I'm fin to slap somebody
same. I can only sit in a chair for so long. Shaping up to be a really good year for both publications
Our happy hour starts at 11am! Get an early start to the weekend!
Thanks, Anthony. It was great. Hope all is well.
No Graduation ticket for him and I #mean that..!
you came through in the clutch though girl
I 1st started wearing Micros because i loved them on back in tha day,Now Im going Natural because she inspires
Thanks for the ReTweet! :)
I must have miss read lol
Coming next week. New bath Salt Sizes - 1lb., 5lb., 10lb., and 20lb.
Dont forget to visit us on the web at www.vancouverwahotel.com
Woot! #Storyline launches! Congrats to the entire #Articulate team and all the beta testers. Great job!
is he the coffee table police?! Put a drink on it without a coaster and see what he does.
if i understand Render unto Caesar what is Caesars...Then that was an early separation of church and state. I'm not a scholar
When did y'all do a logo change?
Sixth Suggestion, Pick an evening or rainy Saturday afternoon where you can spend two hours together watching a movie or cuddling together.
Thanks for the Like Mike!
How cool! I did that, too, this week.
follow me on twitter I need more followers
Looking forward to lounging in Duboce Park if this damn iPhone ever finishes updating!!!!!!!
He's really banged-up. That knee is worse IMO. He seemed to aggravate it tonight..
I love it, that is awesome !
Yes. RT : You can thank Brad Mills for this victory, because, quite frankly, we were not going to hit W.Rodriguez in the 9th
This fog is cool, it was super creepy driving home through it. Loved it!
I would love to go fishing today. Pretty windy, but I almost don't care at this point. Sun is shining and I wanna go fishing
if your gonna exagerate at least make it the world or perhaps the universe. Just a suggestion.
Potus affirms same sex marriage! Even in difficult times, we can take massive step forward!
Can someone kick me in the nuts to get me out of this funk I'm in? :-/
dude that's so tight bra.
You go girl!
The only bad thing about Nickelback is their appearance, lyrics, riffs and music videos.
who knos only time will time
that's just silly
really stepped it up!! Great look's
I like that idea, sounds great.
Show and prove is seriously such an amazing album
We're the original, we're the best. Sugar Shack BBQ Established in 2006 at the GREATEST University in the Nation.
lol that was funny :)
im dark already, I dont need to be darker from my feet & the other half whiter lol :c
I still tweet nonstop but its on . I post the more offensive stuff here as well as more tweets about dunkers
RT Thank you for making us business of the week!
Hey bruh! How'd the competition go?
Black out tomorrow
illness is 60% mental. 90% when you're me. I feel better already. Now all I need is a beer! :-)
Weekend special of $90.00 for 5000 business cards and also $2.99 for 200 assorted white tees with a 1 color print. More options available.
I'll tweet to all my Packer followers tomorrow during peak Twitter hours lol.
Holy shit its to fucking hot! I need to drive!
I hate when ppl try to give advice but its dry... Smh... Don't worry about it hun I will just advise myself
My church's choir was awesome today! "For the Lord our God is mighty, yes the Lord our God is omnipotent...he is wonderful" #FMBC JAX BCH
check that it needs to come 13-4 to be the big payday lol.
It's Game time!
debating whether or not to slut around the last couple weeks of high school. fellow twitterers, lend me your thoughts.
FYI RT : With the #Redskins officially re-signing , the #Redskins also waived TE Rob Myers.
Hey #sandiego - want to know the good places to eat? No fine dining. Check out
.: "I’ve just concluded that...it is important for me to...affirm that I think same sex couples should be able to get married."
Bible,Guitar,Pics,My Cross Necklace,Cowboy Hat,Video Camera.Off To Nevada
Ridiculous call. C'mon.
“: Feels good to be back in the gym...my second home... I <3 ”
Dear #uswomenssoccer please tell #alexmorgan I wanna marry her! Caps off to the whole team it was a helluva run....y'all are #1 in my book
If I go to sleep angry at you, it's rare that you'll get forgiveness.
Well, me and my stepdad just got our faces washed in cool whip by my sister!😃 no need for her to worry paybacks around the corner😄
stayed out too late, partied too hard, drank too much, and every moment was worth it.
We are going to just look around in Munchen today:)
we shood prolly link up soon and talk about stuff. This has been the longest planned meeting of my life
Thank you pretty!! 😊
should be on the court at all times
are you doing anything with node.js these days?
I hope they make the jeep big enough to hold East Portland people in it... East Portland need JOB!!!!
sup snow in PIttsburgh?! Walking in a winter wonderland. If you can't beat em' join em' do I hear...SNOW DAY??!! please.
A great Plato quote "Be kind, for everyone you meet is fighting a hard battle."
< hi Scott. I'm a reporter for AJC and working on Passion 2012. Did you make donation to fight slavery? email me @
Yo I swear these niggas ain't shyt...after what I saw I promise u I won't part mii lips && ask dat ass fa shyt else....SMH
Florida became the 27th state on this day in 1845.
Keep rockin', and keep knockin' Whether you Louis Vuitton-ed up or Reebok-in'
Spotted someone at a Delaware rest stop sporting a Colgate sweatshirt. Wish I had more time so I could have wished her a happy #ColgateDay!
chillin just watching the game
KRIS ALLEN IS TOO TIGHT XD
High praise, indeed. Now to figure out what we can do to top it. Halloween'll be here before we know it.
"I do not fix problems. I fix my thinking. Then problems fix themselves." Louise L. Hay
I'm OCD for UCD (user-centered design) - another participant in grant meting today.
hey TrueBieberFans just wanted to let you guys know if we cant update on here me and pilar will update on our personal accounts. so ...
Our Canons will be firing at the highly anticipated Grand Opening of this Wednesday from 5-8PM.
In #12HOURS I will be crying floods of tears while listening to Turn To You <3 Please follow
Mother is the name for God in the lips and hearts of little children. ~William Makepeace Thackeray
thank u xo
I would really appreciate it if the media would stop enabling Ryan O'Neal's predilection for whining and famewhoring. Thanks.
Just want it to be Wednesday
cue up the Beach Boys for
We on another level
Nobody bunts properly in MLB. Larry Bowa gave a great demo on MLB channel on bunting the other day which shocked me.....
wow, i forgot how good The Olive Garden's food was.
To waken interest and kindle enthusiasm is the sure way to teach easily and successfully. – Tryon Edwards
If I meet a Diana tonight I hope she's dirty.
Getting ready to head to the airport. Bye New Orleans
Got a voice so I use it,I don't need no attourney.I represent myself like a judge without a jury.
What I would give for a good Black and Mild right now. Ugh.
Shoutout to the hottest Realtor in the game!!
Working on a lot of videos! Follow my Personal twitter for more updates,
Big thanks to for hooking us up with the best artist in the world.
lol its straight though!
you too
Yes! Probably in mid-may!! We need a night out!!!
Thanks bro...yeah it's unique!
Can you follow me cause I already follow Funny Truth?
Atta girl ! keeping it real
Looking forward to #NCAA tournament tonight as #WKU takes on Miss. Valley State.
Pretty please follow me💙
Randolph baseball rolls in county tournament opener
DM me. Or on my facebook wall?
you're welcome you deserve it Congrats!!!(: I mean it(:
TD Gugger is a vindictive person <--don't lie to him. He'll eat your lunch. Every time.
Just showing love return it and follow back thanks (J Dash High)
George Hill stopping LeBron and Wade's fast break! Wow is all i have to say....
Girls golf: Wilsonville's Juhee Lee wins individual league title and Wilsonville's Mike Nichols wins NWOC coach of the year.
Today will be no different! Good luck to you, sir!
big hopes for khaleesi
show it off at tomorrow?
Talk like that can get you run out of California I hear.
to the balcony, she peers out through the railings. I kept an eye on Ava and knew other parents who saw me let her go so far from me.
so great meeting you ladies on Sunday! Such a delish and fun night...hope to see you soon!
I play it over and over! You seriously have the sweetest voice. #muchlove <3
I hope every one has a loved filled beautiful evening good night and sweet dreams
I wouldn't have been able to finish my #memoir w/t the <3 of & Thx guys!
Chicken+veg tortilla soup and panini w/t chipotle sauce, bacon, & chicken=Happy Hump Day!
Don’t judge me for my choices when you don’t understand my reasons.
It's all fun and games until someone pisses off dad.
nigga i know u know thats a Kanye & Jay-Z line...lmao
Haha. It's not a long enough layover for me to leave LAX and hang out or nothing.
Oh, thanks for the breakfast vouchers delta. 2 days 2 airlines 1 completed flight 1 turnaround flight. And I'm only in Atlanta.
Taco Tuesday! Get here for select $2 Tacos!
what's the time commitment?
Dear America: Do you REALLY want hate to be what defines this country? If not,
I wish sessions would fight over the screens & not under. Can't keep switching with bigs
yoh I really gotta stop givin ppl my number they be callin me outta the blue & I dont be knowin who it is #that's all kinds a scary
great seeing you guys again too. Just talked to my mom and she totally remembers you guys. Tough 1 last night! Tex is good
Good morning world..... Off day no plans!
I've tweeted...can I get that discount?
"Tuesday Night Showcase": Are you an unsigned artist who would like to perform in NYC - FREE? Call 347 249 9441 for details!
lolol yes. I love cars
Hoes scream for attention on Facebook
Hey people I'm so freakin bored can some one please DM me so I have something to do thx ;)
#Heat #Losers hahaha..No Rose, No Problem!
Three Laws of Robotics appear to contradict each other.
A1: Not if you think you might want to apply for another job with that company. You might get overlooked for one you are!
Eating humble pie
Love those guys!
Girls Lacrosse game
It took 3 seasons for them to get nationals!
So excited for you! :D
Food Allergy Foundation is dedicated to funding food allergy support groups, research, education, awareness and advocacy across the country.
lol. Know the feeling. Well put.
Aye You Already Know I Got You (:
Im already thinking about going back! Takin some time off first then going back probably ;)
As a fan with ties to either school, have to say that is classy. Unfortunately, not at all what I expect from your network
Re: last tweet and - I completely respect the position, but many genealogists believe "why WOULDN'T you want to share?"
I guess Israel will be unleashed after election day.
justin follow me please please please ;) ;) ;) please only please contest me yes please
thank you for telling me that pea and ham soup cannot possibly make me or anybody sick under any circumstances
The UWM Libraries are closed Friday, 25 March for campus-wide Furlough Day & Saturday, 26 March. We will reopen regular hours on Sunday.
Today's word of the day: Maven A.) To urge B.) Keeping on putting off C.) A noxious or troublesome animal D.) Fatherhood E.) An expert
Come watch the Cardinal's tonight in HD!
I walked all the way down the hill... make that threat sooner bro
Thanks for following I look forward to seeing you in Boise.
haha awesome, so I guess it does work out sometimes!! :)
I know it's ad nauseam, but any word if Daniel Thomas will be ready to roll?
You were right - definitely hilarious :)
Ebon youre so perfect. i love you and I will forever be a lurker<333
No. I don't want to play bells on every song.
Let me know if I can help move things forward with any other brands. Oh, and thoughts on the new ?
“Studies show homophobia is more common among people with an unannounced attraction to others of the same sex.” uh oh
Well the Rays and Nats are not the same :/ They have younger teams don't have money to make these long term deals
Delegations for dozens of world leaders visiting Chicago for the NATO Summit will stress city resources,
I have got to start tweeting more smh.
Hey, how is your day going? + Would you please follow me? <AB
I called you not to long ago.. I got a job working at Coach so I can't leave.
Do you boo boo, do you.
That is pretty funny. Wonder if there are some little brother chants as well.
About to do cover the night.(;
Looking for #helpdesk professionals for contract-to-hire opportunities. Let me know if your interested!
still didn't get my moombahswag. I want to rock that old school shirt with the cursive "Moombahton". Great show last night!
KNIGHTHAWKS GOAL! Jamieson picks top shelf putting the Hawks on top by 4.
Oh and if your in my time zone.. Happy #FicarelliFriday & #RedPantsFriday <3
hahah. u r one strange lil girl :D <33
I hope you miss me like I miss you.
that would be great. your customer service staff was not able to do much for me beyond increasing my blood pressure.
heading to bus now
Running late for work but who cares!! It's Friday!
We Must be close, if not, I'll send out another FB & email post. Let me know.
IS GOING TO ROME WITH ME!!!!
Wow. You donated 10,533 food items to the Community Food Bank during Food for Fines Week. Way to go Pima County!
It's ok for your #BestFriend to #Poke your wife...
RT : to host presentation and book signing by ROSE APODACA this Friday, March 9!!!
#NP We Got Hood Love - Mary J. Blige
Yay, campaign season! Where a country's leaders argue like suger high 8 yr olds for months on end.
RT : I hate you Windows 7. I wish you were a Mountain Lion. Umm, because a mountain lion would be so much more helpful???
Just looked out my window to see a cat climbing our neighbor's ladder, looking for all the world like a small, gray furry person.
Did you get the TV mounted?
you got... A Thousand Miles by Vanessa Carlton :D
Learning is not attained by chance, it must be sought for with ardor and attended to with diligence. -Abigail Adams
Sleeping in is over rated when there are great tunes to listen to with Mike Foster and Sunday Morning Over Easy 6-10a Sundays on 101.5.
If you work just for money, you'll never make it, but in the event you always put the customer 1st, success would be yours.
lol thats really funny I feel sorry for you!
Summer is almost here. What are some great nonprofits that help kids go to camp? Any suggestions?
“: is aware of this” you kidding, she's half the reason. I expect Ed to be there. We will do a duet.
I had a dream last night where I was in a band. Our gimmick was that we bolted all our equipment to the ceiling. A lot of clubs hated us.
Striking how much of my time I spend behind glowing screens and curved hulls. I'm feeling nature-deficit disorder.
I need to start thinking how to cook The whole chicken, and I'll have pasta salad..
#reasonsThatImSingle most females nowadays are skanks who already have kids.
#nw teen mom: Wow this kid is really talking down to his pregnant girl like how this happen as of he had nothing to do with it, smh
Thanks guys. I am calling this an 'unfortunate rehearsal incident'. Involved goofing around. Dancing. Disaster.
Just saw a van headin down Light St in #Baltimore. Was hoping it was like an adult ice cream truck. I wanted a blackjack cone
exciting! have a safe trip and best of luck w/the move
Have a great weekend!
GOD BLESS THE SECOND AMENDMENT!!
Problems? Go out and DIG. I find slamming shovel into ground & turning over dirt to be therapeutic. Stress relief + prep 4 tomatoes = cure:)
Lol RT : don't start nothing cus I'm always down for eating lol
Raw deal for your boy. Hate that.
only for donut!
Today is Wythe-fest in my conference room while 1862 occupies the streets of across the way.
I. Want. California.
You're committed to someone else, but here in my mind i have you all for myself.
does anyone know if 1D will be in england in july? I'm trying to convince my dad to take me to england in the holidays..
Yup he hit 2 doubles :)
you're nothing special, you're nothing new.
text me.(:
oh gurl theres a vid on fb and some chick is lipsyncing to fuckin want u back and im just like IMA PUNCH A HOE
once you kill a cow... you gotta make a burger
do you have it
me 8 games at one time on one tv
5/8 #ForOneNightOnly have the #FancyShmancy Package : Dinner, Dessert, Drink then Entry to Tuesdays !
Happy Birthday shout out to !! 
I'm thankful for every beverage I've almost tipped over but didn't.
why thank you sir ;)
when will it be done?
Notice how you've never seen Steven Tyler and Vict Gotti in the same room at the same time? Hmm...
hitting any games next weekend v Philly? I'll be there Friday/Sunday.
Listening in to a responsive web webinar by
Thanks for the RT
Beers of the World will be releasing their beer, Nightfrost Porter, at their Henrietta store tomorrow from 4 - 6 PM!
I guess everybody just fell off the face of the planet today.
Hey thanks!! :) RT : thanks for the RT. We'll have our connect with you. You rock!
Beautiful eyes...window to her heart
you never know if your ready until it happens
Elle Goulding. ♥
It's been a long time comin'. Brew Dr. Kombucha is now on tap at ALL THREE of our teahouses!
It will flow from my body to yours, an infection that can't be cured.
#YEE(: My braces are officially coming off on May 31st!
i hate that frozen strawberry lemonade is trending because reading those words are making me hella thirsty
awww next time!
I'm good at video games specially when it's comes to wrestling
don't call back
Craving some midnight Panda Express.
Which is fine. Move Myers, if it means a quality #1 For 20+ years the excuse has been. "what if..."
For wet spills, extract the material and scrape up the excess.
It's ok JMV, your not stupid just some of these crazy listeners are!!! I got your back.
You're going to ask me out lmfao lol RT :
Good Luck to Track and Field today at UNF! Softball at UCF and Baseball at home vs famu at 1pm! FEAR THE FIN! Let's get some W's!!!
Tom Cruise just gave it to The Artist. The Oscar, that is.
Thinks is funky
My school district has some wacko teachers!
I can only barely skim on iPhone, at meeting... What I saw was shocking and sad! Will read the whole article later on big screen
Caps gear lower prices... Is this insider trading on beer prices?
"Sometimes it lasts in love, but sometimes it hurts instead..." -#Adele #ArtistoftheYear hands down.
"Forget the times of your distress, but never forget what they taught you." - Robert C. Gallagher
wtf?! U flyin a plane right now dude???
So proud of and Michelle Buteau... SHOWTIME, baby!
me too
You are a laser. I just think the whole world should know.
Thank u
I don't care about perfection in the words this time- I repeat- I LOVE the new show 'The LA Complex'.
Sharapova chops off her long blonde hair The tennis star trimmed her long blonde locks. Cast a vote on whether you like it.
Thanks for the tweet re: Dolby Voice!
haha. Thanks. I take that as a great compliment.
- the voice of the Mariners - streaming live on Webex - making history @#ebiznow Philadelphia event!
lolol - yeah destination circuit court.
TODAY: Food Truck Tues from 11-1!Vendors: @% of sales goes2the food bank.
Fuck that was stressful.
when will you be back??! We all should hang!
lol Hahaha we had the best convo's over there ,.
This sun is no joke. I don't think hydrating with alcohol is the best move
Sort of angry with for making me cry last nite. And not laughter tears.
planning...teaching...rehearsing...
If ur a backstreet boys lover feel free to check out my youtube channel. TheBackstreetfan13
..sent it bro! Preciate ya!
You're welcome any time :)
kiss me where it counts
looking forward to you coming to Chicago!
its about that time... nah mean?
Trying to book a flight to Belgium but can't decide which airline is best re: comfort. Suggestions??
#New Year's Eve is okay, could have been better. But #Hugo is a great movie, w/ very good acting!
Finally headed to bed. G'night ppl! 💤😞
Happy are those who dream dreams and are ready to pay the price to make them come true.
Pardon me, but you're obviously mistaking me for someone who gives a fuck.
I literally have the best boss in the world.
Alma: we don't come here to rob, no matter what they say but to work and support the economy
'Hadoop' is the new 'algorithm'
so. yeah.
Waiting forever at the eye doctor. At least he's attractive.
I have never seen a man climb out of a trash can so quickly...
Music inspires the world
Make my own ice cream sandwiches w homemade vanilla bean ice cream, or just eat the whole damn box of 3 doz I bought on impulse at CostCo?
k$ said "happy ending" “: Pastor Freddie Haynes sermon, "A new beginning, for a happy ending!" Resurrection Sunday!”
One day all the work will be worth it
how cool is that? so glad. Reading as we twitter btw.
Mama Evans 💜
ha, Eric, you & Joyce r the rock stars! Actually, I think I've seen pics of you in a feather boa! ; )
Looking to DONATE Your Belongings and Downsize - We have a resale shop!! Call (414) 607-4328 - We donate 100% of the funds received!
Two blonds are sitting on a bench. One says "Which is closer? Florida or the moon?" other replies The moon, You can't see Florida from here!
RT : RT : No school tommorow, the next day, the day after, etc.
RT : I don't procrastinate - I Power Digress!
Avoiding danger is no safer in the long run than outright exposure. Life is either a daring adventure or nothing.
#IfIwasdatingHarryStyles we have been for a while now
Hope U tweets R enjoying the weekend. Heads up. We're almost booked for next week. So give us a ring Monday if you're trying to get in :)
are you high?..
Awesome show last night !! I am a big fan, loved it!!!
I need 's advice!
have fun ya dork :)
Wait, wasn't that pass interference?
6WordSciFiStory - If you're me, Who am I?
Fantastic...just fantastic....SMMFH
Coffee shops most successful group with twitter ad messages. Go
We also provide related materials and self administered learning tools
hi I'm an up and coming actor looking to network with other actors. And find a mentor in the business. FB LOVE MARTIN
Half Off at Westerkamps Steakhouse and Meat Market: - 360 ALREADY sold...
yes. yes you do!
Keep up the great work and defense of our country and constitution!
Fuck you romantic comedies. Fuck. You.
This thunder is vibrating through the building
I #love you my boo <3
i love
Coolest people eva!
followed,follow back please.:)
Who up? Mention me because its looking dry like somebody grandma pussy.
Just watched "Manufacturing Consent with Noam Chompsky". I vote, best comedy of the year!!
<3 :) BUT its's going to be on your Actual birthday not the "fake" one...>.>
Ah ha thats great
"A man's worth is no greater than the worth of his ambitions." Having a vision is only part of becoming something...have to have the DRIVE!
this is real life...this was real is like!
Oh boy.
Anyone want me to answer and Wayne questions sorry but their hasnt been a lot of Tunchi lately
One response is to co-teach with an art teacher. (Be aware of difference between functional v decorative)
Yippee! Hope it's going ok!
yeah it's prob easier on the computer. Never done it through the app. You could also just go to about.me in safari
Has this ever happened to you? You're all ready to GET THIS SHOW ON THE ROAD, and you run over a major POT HOLE? Tires & egos deflated!
You should wrestle next year bro
handling some busy today with Asylum,Def Jam and Koch Records
Quickly changing channels....can't watch the ego coming out.
btdubbbs check yours!!(:
how wonderful!
My nails are pretty and I look like SHIT since I didn't fix my hair
Sausalito! (Not terribly accurate.) RT Chessman! I knew it - my fav. Pepperidge Farm® – Quiz: What’s Your Cookie Personality:
Mix & Mingle is picking up! Lots of great networking. Come by and we'll be here!
So0o many things to do, so little Time~
The Witcher 2: Assassins of Kings (Enhanced Edition) - Dark Outfits FAQ
congrats on the Shape feature!!
I'm fAdED fAdEd FaDeD
Patients is VITUE
I did meet him..
Just seen this all red house.
The most creative artist out!! I am so inspired
So excited. RT One more day.
just coordinating a Craft Party, Summer Show & Holiday Show for & prepping for the shows I'm in. No big deal.
Bitch I Want The Green One Hoe
dota before going to work!
ayyyyee girll what did you get today??!
He looked so perfect :).
Speak of the Devil… and she’ll show up!!!
We need to take a stand for God and stop just putting a face on for Sunday and live it through the week. Come on guys.
It's follow friday! Who should be following?
Country Music Awards on ABC.
RT : I haven't seen my besties in so long I'm sad I miss her.
Buy one book on feminist art from Amazon, Amazon believes all you want from now on are books about feminist art
I'm coming back to nj
maynard i miss you!
just commented!
well ill hit you back......softly lol :p
I love it when CBS 60 minutes exposes US political corruption. They do it better than almost anyone. Am very much watching tonight.
Thanks, , for a great kick-off party at the last night! Good to see our friends from
RT Remember, #alamw12: nearly all meetings are open; you don't need official permission to be there. Your org.
And here are some culprits! You guys are making me hungry.
Who cares what pool your party'in at, is it topless?? We are!!! Get down here now! We going strong!
Thanks! And it now occurs to me how good those two things would taste together.
More info on the Social Media job in Baltimore...
God has not called us to see through each other, but to see each other through. ~Author Unknown
Segway police patrols adding an additional night per week in June keeping Midtown among the safest neighborhoods in Baltimore.
these shirts need a home! one of them will go to our winner! Medium: violet sheep, white superhero Large: lightpink sheep, white superhero
How convienient, I get sick during a snow term. Perfect! :D
Chester taylor!!!!!! Ya!
Go buy new album! Released today! Amazing! Available everywhere and iTunes!
that is so true for me right now...
heard Native Americans moved silently through woods, but question whether did not say, 'mbpffffft!!' when catching mouth of cobweb & spider
Agg my head and trough hurt so bad right now...and I am hungry!!!
really gonna miss this young man hope he can go out with a bang & one more time shows US MILLER TIME
come back to Kansas
Once you've been hurt, you're so scared to get attached again, you have a fear that every person is going to break your heart.
Good morning Amsterdam, crap its 5:30.. Wow our clocks are jacked.
WET and POWER 102 TONIGHT call Sarah 915-449-2066 WET ULTRA LOUNGE and $2 DRINKS ALL NIGHT LONG,
Balboa Park creates more traffic from smart use of 10K Google Ad Grant than they get from Bing and Yahoo #MCN2011. Neat!
I LOVE that music video more than any music video I have EVER seen!!!❤ I love both of u!!! (:
Delicious :) We were bottling our first-ever batch tonight (nut brown ale), but roommate broke the capper on bottle
"The system didn't like what (Salazar) was reporting," -- Philip Montez, US Commission on Civil Rights and a Salazar confidant.
Where'd that weekend go? Monday seems too soon, late on a Sunday night!
Friday flashback jam: Birdland - "Sleep With Me
he's good, but my impersonations are infinitely better haha
7 likes baby. Tag us or share our page. Everything appreciated.
do it immediately! Then you'll understand what I meant in my last tweet.
Fun stuff, you seen Avengers yet?
Let's just end it tonight boyz
great game, that was a sweet catch!
There are two types of people in this world. Those who give a damn about shoes and those who don't.
We hope to see you at tonight's CAKE. Don't think of our get togethers as stuffed shirt networking events. We like to consider them parties!
Gingrich appeals to the very worst in Americans in the name of what makes America exceptional.
RT Time to get serious about this wedding diet/exercise. 5 and a half months... Here we go!
can't wait to see you busting those 3's in that Kentucky uniform. Go Cats!!
How in the fuck is my debit card mia????
this is his iphone, this is the real austin ----> sorry if you felt I was him
wait snow?
It's from the NYTimes Sunday Review, Oct. 15th. The title is "Notes from a Dragon Mom." Heartbreaking but beautiful & important.
he's been at the park all day
lovin this sirus radio in this rental car.
it wld b interesting to see who cld do better. The people r getting tired. It's time 4 a overhaul.
can't believe my first week of law school will be midtown cocktail week. good sign or great sign?
The secret of success in life is for a man to be ready for his opportunity when it comes. ~ Earl of Beaconsfield
#libchat then clearly you're doing something else wrong... But what?
9:50 - getting my eye mask & travel pillah ready. Just got a rice Krispy treat the size of my head to fill me up & put me out.
#nowplaying Slight Work (Feat. Big Sean) by Wale, via WORK IT WORK IT
Lets Make Moves
do you guys have any cultural touristy things in mind for Poland, or just football?
yeah I got a new number!
Well apple sure can make a fine phone but they can't make mp3s sound any better. Maybe One day mp3s will sound like vinyl...dreaming is free
It's way too early to be up this is ridiculous.
' It's the end of the year an these hoes really showing they Ass lmao!!
: Don't find love, let love find you. That's why it's called falling in love, because you don't force yourself to fall
People still going on about Concords? So last year,
PLEASE mate, follow me! I aint desperate but I'm too breezy for you and want you to follow me or retweet me init
Now turn your music down and GET OFF MY LAWN!!
“If what you are doing is not moving you towards your goals, then it’s moving you away from your goals.”
eight more days... and counting...
Wow, you suck!
when your bestfriend is scared of your mom so he doesn't bring you your food .
"surprise and delight", y'know? :)
Thanks:) I HOPE He'll Listen To An #Angel That's Crying Out For Him:))
Peanut butter cookies, milk and Netflix. Good Sunday night.
Just saw satellite shots of the oil spill. My God...
just so your aware, I have you website scheduled to update to the new wordpress 3.3 tonight around midnight.
Henry Kissinger also in #DC tomorrow for book event. Speaking on China. Busy day for celebs in DC tomorrow!
no iTunes?
XO so ur....A GHOSTYYYYY :o o o o o o o:
Thanks to and for pointing out my new twitter obsession:
Agreed. That is awesome!
Thyme is always $6.99 per pound and the food will be ready when you get there!
First tweet! Yay!
Off to Fairhaven for research trip. Picking up Mark Twain letters for exhibition. Wanna visit Coe Hall again to see?
Dumb bitch at work thought my Hermes H buckle was Hilfiger
where can I get one?
All glory to God family. Keep bringing us that FIYA!
Strange happenings today. I'm left wondering...
:) hope the sun is shining on U :)
Oh ya RT : So tell me, it's good luck to move into a new place during the #SuperMoon, right
who agrees we should get #weloveGreyson trending!!(:
Thanks! Same to you!
“: Yeah maybe see you ” looking forward to it.
OH: I just got bitch slapped with a lolly pop!
Sometimes I look at the names of people who have had my textbooks before me and I look them up on Facebook...
you guys are so gay for each other haha
So true MT Every time a #museum publishes content only in print form, it is fundmt undermining its mission in a digital culture
I know and he is a good guy and probably went overboard but you should have never started anything, let UK fans enjoy
hate's it when businesses use social media for Spam..putting links on here that lead to browser warnings...smh
We need 20 more friends to like our page to reach 1,000! Recommend our page today and help us get 1,000 likes!
Hot new single Juelz Santana, Twin-c Vanilla SPilla, & Papoose be sure to vote for the track at coast2coast mixtapes!
Felt pretty high up riding around in Megan's Yukon Denali....love that she chose the hybrid
Happy Birthday ! I wish you many more & countless blessings for you & your family. XoXo :)
i unfollowed too bitch!!!!
Girl scout cookies for a year? You're playing with fire.
Projected movies are even boring like almost everything else in the trad/conv clasrm - provide surround sound [and loud] to pump up things.
Thanks so much! looking foward to working and sharing with you all
working on anything good tonight?
Who still says Da Bomb???
Oan: cooling watching this movie...!
help! our school's iDEC stopped working. The power button flashes yellow & red but nothing is plugged into the input. What do we do?
I feel desolate.
On my grind hope you on yours
haha hay!!! where are you gonna end up going? and yes! well, mostlikely haha idk which day, and you?
hahaha so sad I actually do see this
Pleasure meeting you guys today! I helped you at the reference desk
yes indeed! :-) Here's to trying!
Im actually kinda out of it today,,,.
Thunder, lightening, hail and now Werelemurs. All thanks to this nutty Super Moon.
RT CRACKIN' HANGOVER CURE: Amino acids in poached eggs erase the pain, says Journal of Inflammation Research.
If anything is used to its full potential, it will break
Cutting this grass <<< this lil bro job
It's a band...somewhere in/near Mt. View tonight...I'm so helpful.
Thanks for the follow! I hope all is well up in Santa Fe. Keep us in mind for for unique gifts and personal service.
Yum!! RT Elotes from the shopping cart in the hood! M!
Welcome : Thanks for RTs: happy #FF clean car?
RT : The only way to have a life is to commit to it like crazy. -Angelina Jolie
Dang woman!! You're so good at your job :)
“Facebook + Texting = Textbook. So I’m studying right?”
You rock yo.
My son learned to clap today. He won't go to sleep because he won't stop playing and clapping.
getting ready to call it a nite
When you feel incomplete when he's not around. “: Finish this tweet: You know you're in love when _________.”
Really loving the collection website. smart and clean design.
Way to go ravens!....Ok D you see what they are about, lets put the clamps down on them!
I know many of us will be attending Olivia's Instagram show opening that weekend. That's a great starting point.
thanks for the twitter follow
solid episode last night!!!
I'm in school lol
Glad they switched Sherlock's opiate addiction to a smoking addiction.
Went to set up new #Omeka install for our digital student archive on today & they go & have catastrophic outage. Not a good sign.
49 k views!! That's like 8k views yesterday...almost to 50 k. Tell your friends to watch "down" on YouTube!
Wisdom is the ability to see a situation for what it really is...
All I want in this world is a still-frame of the face Lieutenant Ilia makes in Star Trek: The Motion Picture when she's first scanned.
Staying up to watch the news and then going to bed.
Wow! Do you speak all of those languages? Appreciate the follow!
Good Morning! “If opportunity doesn’t knock, build a door.” - Milton Berle
RT: : Nowadays "cool" means "I really don't care" "sick" means "awesome" and "I love you" doesn't mean anything.
Whip it.
I thnk I want some cereal
kid's a winnah!
Just signed the lease for and my apartment! So stoked
RT : Cant wait for this series! RT : Just became a big Indiana #Pacers fan.
Falling asleep way too much at my conference.
yummy what kind of cookies you like?
So uh...haven't been on Twitter for a while...
People should think before the speak. Rude. Lol
marshmallow chicks
He came out as a middie/striker, transitioned to a Dmid role. Also transitioned to a bench role...
Watching the girls progressively undermine imposed game of scrabble tonight was like watching ants take over a picnic & steal all the food
Want to take a ride into the danger zone AND support active duty military? Check out Kansas City BBQ's Turkey Day event! kcbbq.net/events/
OK, how do you want to get them? Tomorrow? Perhaps you can pick them up and I can ride with you to the club if you go?
Or I might name my son Johnny .. if I have one lol
Sick as f*%#, thnx babe
Full moon this week at sunrise. Nice backdrop for an amazing time to run in Arizona. Increasing the miles and increasing speed. Let's go!
hangin out with my daddy.:)
Middle East Online
So glad Shaw is back!
Thanks for ur hard work! The East Coast appreciates you!!!
Join the brothers of #UBAKPsi in our Wii Game Night at 7pm tonight in Flint Village! Pickups are at 6:45pm in the SU Lobby!
indeed, I'm a believer! Hope the burrito biz is good
Excuse my language, but I feel like a complete asshole. A stupid one at that. Pardon me while I cry myself to sleep. Goodnight.
Thanksgiving- The holiday where we are thankful for family and friends... and then revert back to extreme capitalism the next day
Yes I am a Bitch. Beautiful intelligent tall charming and humorous.
A parade of Delorians just drove by me in Old Town.
I never understood why some women get offended by being called ma'am. It doesn't mean you're old it's a sign of respect.
CNI Closing, 2:15: Bernard Frischer, "Beyond Illustration: New Dimensions of 3D Modeling of Cultural Heritage Sites and Monuments"
totally! Is there a day in June when you're free?
iv never really watched it lol but its all iv seen on twitter today lol x
same number?
Too Cold .
Nothing to much, But umm Like 2 things first Imawesomefoo said to demote me for inacitvity when I hold 1-2 traing week
Lolol unless is hiding some!
hex yeah!!!
are you just noticing that?
if you want to
PROBABLY GOES TO MATH INSTEAD WHAT A CUTE WIZARD
hope #titans r watching. This is what a team with heart does. #texans have no chance at playoffs but play like they do.
Lot's of fun choice's for Pari's! RT : In bed watching The Simpson's and playing Modern Warfare on Playstation. ☺
Please Follow PBR_Detroit
Thx for following me new followers
I seriously cant wait till I have my own car to drive home in.
That's how we ended up with a "Sebi" ... Be careful, they stick!
Prepping for pre-Santarchy parties in D.C. Moving speakers and decorations from house to warehouse
where did u hear tht or wat website i need 2 noe !! :D
sounds like my kind of event!
One machine can do the work of fifty ordinary men. No machine can do the work of one extraordinary man. Elbert Hubbard
Erryyone best be putting #dirtywork in their tweets. ;)
it's hot outside. i always forget how hot the summers in houston get, and this is still technically 'spring'. ugh.
May hit 115 here in Glendale Az today hot hot hot
what's your username?
"Chivalry is timeless". I love that saying, with that being said I have to get on some of the fellas.
I'll be there!
Almost summer vacation
"Be the change you wish to see in the world." You know #Gandhi, I think I will take you up on that.
I think everyone figures out what works for them eventually. It's all a journey and a process, you know?
good morning!!!
Ueah, but don't you have friends that like beer and pizza?
But the #Brewers are just 4 Ryan Braun solo homers from tying the game.
U.S. Employers added no net workers last month for the first time since February 1945.
I've been reading this book for two hours. Almost half-way through. Thank the lord Jesus for iBooks.
So stoked for June 11th when A Place Bury Strangers plays !
Fuck this(: tattoo time... Peace
Happy Mothers Day to all the moms out there. Enjoy every minute of it!!
thanks for spoiling it for me... ;)
Does your publishing company make sure ur copyrights are secure? We do! Now Accepting Affiliations for PERFORMING ARTISTS!! RT!! RT!!
I'm here to announce a secret meeting of loyal Twitter users. Operation : Safe House. Code name: #CovertTU Commencing: 01.25.11 ~
Its magic ya know...never believe its not so. Haha you're welcome and thanks for the follow suggestion!
Thanks for coming out to the show!! xoxo
Traffic is moving well at my house - made it easily from the kitchen to the coffee pot to the home office.
Lovely town! My parents used to live there in the early 90s, but not much interesting dining then.
thank bro
: So glad you agree! Also can't stand how once the movie tie-in comes out, it becomes impossible to find the original in stores...
Talk, love & respect God when you're in His presence AS WELL AS when you're not! It's the only way a relationship will grow deeper
if you enter code:lesher100 in the rep code box
hi jasmine~ good morning~ love you so much my dear friend~ have a great day and take care <3
just recently moved? Our boxes can be re-used for wrapping all those Christmas gifts!
tweet tweet pass
It's beautiful out!
MT Maybe as early as today but no later than Thursday Jeff Casteel will leave WVU for Arizona
I dont remember but if u search him he'll come up
Success - Try not to become a man of success but a man of value.
Thats why im single now...smh..
When Austin used to say " #grindsmygears " all the time(':
If I start getting 100's of resumes sent to me in boxes, I'm sending them ALL to you at CNBC, Darren.
Mexicans are smoking hot*! *pot
BLING BLONG ALL DAY LONG KIDS! come get you some!
Digitizing newsletters from the 1980s! Hard not to read them all- interesting stuff.
haha, you guys can't fall off the map now that you got big daddy Kolb. Div winner or bust
Smog test guy, "Your car passed. No problems." Me, "Really? I mean, seriously? 'Cause this car has no business passing a smog check."
imdb just taught me that Sean Connery turned down the role of Gandolf. I think LOTR dodged a bullet with that pass.
congrats Hun!!! Knew u had that
@ love you my fellow twinsie
“: , Would you support a nationwide strike in #solidarity w/Chicago teachers? In support of REAL #publiced change?”
anything is possible with #beersoup !! I promise to research it and get back to u!!
Its usually these high aggravation days that someone will post a "Why you should shoot RAW" article and send me over the edge.
did you break smodcast? haven't been able to download anything smodcast since friday. What's up?
I'm sure Undefeated was great, but it's a joke that wasn't part of that category. Def one of the best films of the year!
awww, no lie haha my friend and I were thinking of moving out to LA by next year! I'll be back soon
#PlansForTheSummer going to Thailand or Tokyo for my birthday
that must be the only place in buffalo with such stringent moral codes...
Know of a local, private organijzation that assists veterans with job placement and counseling? Looking to interview a VRC.
#greenandyellow green and yellow!!!!! Go Packers
Oh yes. I have some web sites I buy from and make some good scores. It's fun. Also I only collect a certain vintage
You know you dirty, right? Lemme wash you up...
Merry Christmas, happy holidays, seasons greetings, bon noel, ho ho ho, glad tidings, happy Hanukkah ... etc, enjoy!
I don't believe they track the numbers at this stage--sorry I can't shed some light!
So, should we start announcing our Classroom of the Future Grant winners???
#WhatGetsMeMad; Myself. I can be such a push over, I hate it. My intentions are good though..
let's hope Ecuador can get some points tomorrow
You deserve a smile you can be proud of & we can make it happen! Call Madison No Fear Dentistry on how to save $250 on invisible braces :)
Awesome take a picture!
class in the morning babe :(. Get to sleep!
heck yeah im down but I gotta get a board first!
good luck! Let's see some gluten-free cooking!
Nice shot of the show at !
that sounds awesome. Hopefully they still have it when I go back, whenever that is lol.
Sorry ? Really It's just that Idk like i said, I'm paranoid with that haha lol.
HEY I like ur face, will you marry me?
Is anyone going to see the #BeachBoys in Baltimore tonight?
COME visit us! We have #triverahappyhour and we can share a light saber!
Oh cool! I was worried it was a dumb idea and everyone would be like "UGH DON'T NO ONE CARE ABOUT YOUR KID"
God Morning Tweeps!! Have a happy and safe 4th of July!!
it nine and i realize looking for a place on craiglist is sucks but if u moving to Mississippi then great cost of livin seem cheap
I wish Youtube's new Analytics was quicker with the stats feedback. #HatCat stats are stuck on 1/13 data, and I'm dying to track it further.
Many submit to despair and fail without realizing that they really possess all the tools required to procure great wealth.
Hosting The Miami Herald Small Business Forum at FIU! Come follow at
Anyone still looking for #BradPaisley tickets for Friday?
Thanks all for sharing about Mr. Jer's family! |
Our interior design is inspired by the power and elegance of the art deco movement of the 1920’s and 1930’s.
miki is on the desk at powell. call her if you need help with anything. see you tomorrow!
Haha, looking forward to seeing it in 28 days!
YEAH IM GONNA TRY AN BE IN HEAR MORE NOW THAT MY LAPTOP IS FIXED
WOW You mentioned Bills? I am from Point. The only restaurant my family went to when I was a kid. Best pizza, hands down!
#stlwx Okay, really? We got thunder with our infrequent and cold rain by Lambert Int'l Airport.
The Red Wings kicked some ass tonight!
I'm watching it.
well aren't you fancy! Have fun!
is this real life? Becky B. on the Twitter?
who doesn't like a warm sausage?
Tim #Tebow will be introduced to NYC at 10am MT / 12pm ET. Get ready for the whirlwind New York.
Books = Paper(!) = Toilet Paper...thought the senders of a press release for "the only hygiene tissue paper conference":...
me too this shit is crazy
Now a NASM Certified Personal Trainer here to help YOU get healthier, leaner, stronger, faster....BETTER.
That is some scary sounding thunder
It was a pleasure to meet you as well!
What is not started today is never finished tomorrow. Goethe A #business or #executive #coach can help u get there!
RT Some will take U under their wing bc they're afraid if they let U fly alone ul soar higher than them>REAL TALK follow him
I think I have become immune to Tom Shane's voice
"being sick is has got to be one of the most infuriating things to deal with..................... Along with stupid people"
@ the airport headed to dc to shoot a fab wedding tomorrow
Bullshit call Blue.
Parks and Rec break from the Draft. Not even 1 minute in we get a Hoosiers reference. It's gonna be a great night!
"Do we strive for excellence or perfection?" Whats the difference? Your thoughts.
thank you!!
Save a horse, ride a cowboy.
about 25 minutes west of Springfield there is a gas station replica created by Gary Turner that is really neat.
Thank you for the book!!
Good morning, how's everything going?
I get on twitter to see that loves me! That just makes me 10 times happier.
you guys can dance i wish i had a crew like yours to auditon for abdc !
Who was #mycrushof2011? I had two! #ChrisPine & the #GeicoGecko. Yeah. Don't judge.
Watchin boyz n the hood... I still hate watchn the part when ricky gets shot
so does the same go for a relationship
Taking part in e-reading device surveys for Really interesting and pertinent questions! Can't wait for the results
Thanks for the mention!
ordered six (count-em) pounds of cheddar cheese from farm-way. Have to balance well-being and brain food with cholesterol!
OH wow! If ya'll have any free time let me know. I'd love to catch up :). I haven't seen her since...Nov 09 or something
Scott Walker's running late. Very unusual.
Dear MBTA Red Line- thank you for giving me more sweat-dripping, body-to-body action this morning than I've had in the past month.
oh ok
you forgot to tweet me!!! :'0
I am the white
“: car accident.”
I have a question for you
oh hey
Such a crime, not a single a word?
And I remember when I walked in back last Fall...Great job team Go #Obama2012!
87 in your mouth
im sorry i got irritated
Do you need a designer for all those lovely things? :)
thanks for the tip
Straight up obsessed with my dental health lately
Calls from my ex talkn bout how she stress I just listen to keep them white folks out my check
I agree AMG!. I look at the profile for my museum and just don't see this as an option, Could be wrong, don't think so
of course :-) done. thx
Last roadshow of the season!!!
Yes. There is a Pizza place by the entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel that has 50 cent slices of pizza.
Get the convenience of the keypad lock & peace of mind of the built-in alarm lock all in one! Check it out on Pinterest!...
blah....im so bored=p
At the Apollo watching and perform. This show is incredible! Just keeps getting better!!!
Does any school really teach this? Only programs I've seen that do are Urban Design ones.
Where did yhu go
Please rain :)
I hear ya! Some seem to think that their opinion is more important and more right than those of us that don't write a blog.
Why am I so stupid?
Not going to Toots anytime soon.
Make it Happn Capn ": Had a dream last night that I was shooting a film in Tokyo. I never ignore my premonitions..."
The value of experience is not in seeing much, but in seeing wisely
MT : During depression we built Hoover dam & other projects that helped 2 fuel our economy 4 decades. We must think big again
You're very welcome! Enjoy!
the light at the end of the tunnel will be out due to high cost of living
GONNA FUCK YOU IN THE EAR 
Sad I missed cookies and cream froyo , wondering what password is for wifi if it's for customers.
Your Twitter may have been hacked. Got an odd DM from you. FYI.
We think you're great too!
A parade of color in motion parading constantly on the stage.
hey, its gotta get done!
I heard Mumford and Sons was strange last night. Let's hope they can pull it together for their remaining shows....
I had a dream that and myself met again,but he was too distracted by 's pants to talk to us. -.-
Stop chasing after perfections. Instead, stop and look at what you have, and you'll realize that what you have is better than perfection.<3
how do we get from back problems to crack?
Come hang out in a gangsta's paradice w/the rest of the hoes and bros here
i LOVE surprises! life's busier than ever. we should have another star trek party when the movie's out. hows your life stranger?
Police hunt for suspect in Kensington fatal shooting. We talk to a man who spoke to suspect Phil Gilberti AFTER the shooting on News4 at 6
Headed to la la land in March for something nice! #weedropweerock!!!
couldn't agree more.
I don't get the lack of minutes for C Smith. Why is he in the dog house. I mean seriously play the whole darn team.
Chinese imports back to selling......
how was your Skype with Ryan Beatty??
“: 😭😭😭😭 miss you!!!!!”<Miss u more!! I'm glad I met u. Ur such a sweetheart & a Wonderful addition 2 my life!
I love how almost all my new followers are band members. c:
Jesus had some water and 6 large jars... Altered an entire wedding party & proved God's miraculous nature!
Bowdren goes down swinging to end it, Hokies take the second game, 4-2, final score.
I followed .. follow me back?
yep, that's it!
WHO is that puppy? Where is it? Can I hug it?
In my freakn anatomy lab :(.
So much to do!
RT : Even this early in #SpringTraining Roy Halladays breaking ball is simply disgusting
My sister's a horrible driver. Smh.
Three little birds by bob marley<3
Is everyone keeping up with their New Year's resolutions?
Yea!!! Reached 200 tweets! I enjoyed class
The season has started! How exciting!
Congrats to the Seattle Sonics on their game 1 win! Oh wait...
as much as I like baseball going to all 82 games puts you on the level with Star Trek fans.
is that suppose to be like methhead lol, u need to start tweeting ryan
Someone doesn't need to watch the calories.
I think every sorority girl just wanted into the building.
Read my previous tweet! Will be in Copenhagen this time next week - yahoo!
oh please. all that mattered was that heel and you couldn't tell on that shot. go back to sleep.
yeah I know that's how rumors get started, haha I had office assistant first period and they were telling me haa
#ThingsBlackPeopleLove being told "you are not the father" Thanks Maury
You're the man. That is all.
The Phoenix & Lil' Wayne - EP is pure
Spending a lot of time thinking about whether to buy a curling iron. Making this into some weird political decision about gender.
Since I'm going into work an hour and a half early tmrw I think I should at least be allowed to wear pjs.
chillin bruh knocking did grad school out!
nothing better than someone touching your soul. Physical is fleeting. An impression on your spirit is everlasting.
that's why it's the best sport in the world
He's up to 48 followers but his tweets are locked, that might be the issue.
I don't get that one either. I hope they don't boo Sveum
Today TC and I went to McDs for lunch and weird lady was watching me, and started talking to us saying I looked familiar.
Expect full-throttle #Marchmadness vibe at the BC today -- #mubb v. G-town -- will be a good test for center-less MU (again)
Oh. I forgot. Also the surgical mask wearers.
love the book Virals!!
is not leaving everything in Texas, he's taking everything with him!! :)
Say ur blessings and pray for others as u would 4 yourself sweet dreams and lots of love muahhhhh
u kno, u bin sayin that a lot 2 me lately...u gona hurt my feelins
The wife, corrects me...we rented Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy.
So it looks like Kobe is focused on the playoffs. Sitting out of tonight's game
hm...that looks familiar!
yess & I kno u sauced. I can read it in ur tweet
May 12: Reception 5:30; Program and Live Auction 7; Silent Auction throughout the evening
Singing time (:
I.WANT.CHRONICLE.POWERS. I'd be like Matt, but as powerful as Andrew and use my powers for good!
Lmao .. i understand
Keeping yourself abreast of the latest indexes of stocks is a must and is one of the most important online stock trading strategies
1215 ( magma carta), 1588 (defeat of Spanish Armada) and the year beginning the Industrial Revolution (varies).
RT: Next week will be our #mediachat guest on the topic of "Brand Loyalty". Thursday at 10pm EST.
Wicked BBoy Moves! "J-Deezy" is the new nickname?
Learn how companies are using inbound marketing techniques to generate higher volume and lower cost leads and customers
Things could always be worse! Actually wait...things are pretty bad in Indy right now. At least your not Tim Wymer! Haha.
Oh I'm not from the states. Obviously you weren't around when I created this account ha ha (yes this is how Arod laughs).
After serial internal testing for coming Mac app, I'm back and would like to share my experience.
Right... but it's a joke. Pointing about the absurdity of looking to the Bible make the point that God doesn't approve.
Getting ready for HOW Interactive
I had to out creep you, it was easy...
ha a blasty blast. Let's meet up again soon.
Just got back from the Lake. My arms hurt, but had a really great time. I also saw Bat man's boat too! Lol :D
without seeing it my guess are the Davenport Brothers.
Born in the city, raised in the country.
RT hey ladies - I look forward to the next event - keep me posted. > thanks. :-)
When The Wickedly Wise Enemy Puts Information out it is to produce A Calculated Response
Hey you guys should tour/play a show with this cool band :D
Something's really wrong with the world when you've become so blinded by a so-called "good book" that you can't see the evils around you.
hahaha that. is. awesome
i will retweet them for you if you want?(:
Happy Cinco De Mayo!!!
#ImportantFactsAboutMe I'm nothing that needs yo be fucked with. When I blow, Ima blow like a fucking bomb.
no problem handsome
I don't know where you are, but have you been to BGR? There are a million flavorings you can mix with whatever you want.
Giving twitter another try!! Really trying to get into it!!
OK CLIENTS... The next STREAK you've been waiting for is right around the corner.. I feel it
Haha um u know what, maybe! Lol Theres somestuff poppin...the question is if ill be up to it tonight...haha
seriously! We can't pay for what we are spending! Release your 1040's so we can see how much taxes you are paying!
and where are u tonight !? X
Maybe is counting down the number of songs she has to finish for her album.
True that! When r your upcoming trips? RT : What's poppin ? The season is here! About time 4 #chipsandskitrips!
even a strong person has their breaking point
Like to listen to boosie girls <3.
resturant inside ikea... is that really necessary??
NOW broadcasting @ www.getrichradio.com is the Communication Coach himself, Dwan Bent-Twyford! Listen now and win the $1000 CASH prize!
My spiritual community would like to wish you a blessed new year... blessings!
It's days like these that remind me why I love this city so much.
nothing just got home. You?
Ball at Broncos 32, 29 Yards Kick Return.
Spencers corner was a fool I think I recked it but I know my lit niggas Lil DD and the hooligan tore it up man y&#39;all get ready
It's amazing how many people I know who o to #PLA2012 when it's on the East Coast.
Dude: silken tofu, herbs, garlic, lemon juice and zest, s&p, oo, nutritional yeast, over pasta and asparagus. #vegan cc
"If you're not posting to Facebook w/ photos & it's your job... you should be fired." says
The phone ain't even ring the whole time....?
September 4: Release Date for LOVE SLAVE!
yeah 3 months ... I don't like this operation cause they had to put wires in her heart is scary as heck
Today is free music at the library! Join us here from 1-3pm and check out Retro Rocket. Also bake sale to benefit Anime/Manga club.
I really don't know what to do anymore. :(
Basically... that's my life story. Nothing else. That is all.
I wish #oomf could come cuddle
This new movie on Lifetime is a little bit creepy...
#SoTellMeWhy some buy a car to go to work to buy a car to go to work
yes. Yes I will.
I'm Mr. Piggy
Jennifer Hudson's tribute was perfect... gave me chills.
If Aundrea Fimbres came to my house and sang Damaged I would feel so much better!
yes, yes #Wilfred is a new fave....
Why do people go to starbucks to do the same shyt they do on their computers at home? WTF
My mom talked to me today, & that talk opened my eyes. I might say I'm a Christian, but the things I say & do weren't convincing (c)
#ExpertVisibilityTip: Advertising is paid placement, PR/media relations is unpaid placement as an expert source. They are not the same.
lol i think this is my 1st time on twitter this early.if i do get on i jus check my mentions so its my first time seen u! lol
SB128 is adopted! It represents a small step toward meeting CO's long term care crisis
happy to move on to your point, esp if you concede that appearance attacks are out of bounds.
Our transition to Hubspot software is complete and in just a few hours of use, 08 new sale inquiries have resulted. Best move we ever...
so true
hey do u have chat off on merge? tried to add u on skype yo
aw :) reminds me of u during our 65th street days...lol
Thanks! Empty classroom at SIS or do you think I should go home? Argh... this is probs stressing me out more than it should.
Don't get me wrong- its a good final 3. But Kim now has to live with taking her biggest threat 2 the end, so she cant be upset if she loses.
Dancing in the rain!
People discriminate against eachother more for their culture than for their skin color.
Yah, it can suck giving something you put your blood, sweat & tears into and it not being appreciated. Knit on!
can't wait for this weekend. so many good things...
Over wknd, our building was tagged with a lot of very large graffiti defacement pieces. It was very disheartening, BUT ...
what is the record for Austin?
We make our own mozzarella from mozzarella cheese curd every day.
Thanks for the RT!
you know you love it...
yes thats why I want to sleep but stupid girls and their ice -.-
Why does Siri decide to be a giant attention whore only when I'm in class? 😳
How was the wedding today??
uhh...a ninja w/ their jet pack on backwards
who ya goin with??
Please NO MORE Fockers after this. What great actors will do for a check nowadays. Smh
It's always fun seeing a what they think is a #dynamite turn into a little wuss #flare. #thankyou come again wish you had tried harder
Our animation film about young Holocaust survivor (animated by my son Perry Chen ) won IF Best Animation Award, see AWN:
An,e.fdj
The secret of success in life is for a man to be ready for his opportunity when it comes. – Benjamin Disraeli
Lunchtime=awesome walk downtown.
The Kaltman family is committed to Holocaust remembrance and education, and it is our privilege to present this course in their honor
Thank you! RT : Look for a story in the Sunday edition about A.L. students competing in Destination Imagination!
: fuck with me
aim is pissing me off --___--
Just because I dig using power tools doesn&#39;t mean I have gender identity issues! Makita cordless drill - ooh baby!
I've officially been awake for 24 hrs. Finally laying my tired body down. Awesome!
awesome. You're awesome, CSI Miami is awesome and you and KoRn on tour again are awesome. This is just one big ball of awesomness!
Thanks Neil! Any suggestions to make my content better?
QT : is that good or bad?//bad! I loved that house, and someone bought it first!
Say Its J-Peezy, Im A 15 Year Old Rapper tryna make it in dis Industry, Follow Me, ill Follow You, Get at Me Ya dig?!
LOVE the ICONic Boyz but now that Vin is gone it makes me sad to see pictures of just 6 I wanna be like you're missin' one..
so tired from laying out in the sun all day☀
Why Australian literature is alive and well and living in our universities - Sydney Morning Herald
Live on your Android on Tune in radio RADIO AND ON YOUR LAPTOP
you know whats nice about being out at 930 on a wednesday....the babies are in bed
me and are coming to your manchester show in onsies because we're so awesome... ;)
please call this number 254-716-4646 Please its my friends birthday! :) She would be so happy! :) 3
Isn't funny how alot of people are stuck in there own little bubble of a world and dont realize there more to life than what just is..
Dick Lugar is a Friend of Africa, so I'm sad to see him go. But his loss is probably good news for the Dems in November.
I think that album was a late 2011 release. Am I wrong ?
Can you please get information for the NYC meet and greet!? Thank you! XOX
What's your favorite meal that your Mum made for you?
You've arrived.
Basking in the normalcy.
Can we prioritize the things that we'll digitize by user audiences? Who are those user audiences? age groups, digital natives, etc.
“: Today is National Pig Day! So ladies, be sure to take a moment and remember all the men in your life.”
#wipfairies were hard at work. Just sent revisions to my agent!
This is a great idea, man. It's like a more organized version of my Google Reader feed.
you win for best twitter name! Not sure what you win... But you do!
and they obviously involve you
Didn't get the pearls, fudge
the middle keys are beautiful! Resorts, diving and fishing. Key West is fun, but more spring break bachelorette party kind of fun.
“When there’s no more room in Hell, the dead will walk the Earth.” Dawn of the Dead (1978) (George A. Romero)
Doh! RT : Nothing better than gettin 3/4 way thru car wash & realizn u left back window partially down....idiot Adam!!
Thanksgiving Blend!
The Princess James man crush phone lines are wide open AGAIN
I want to go home
Sorry. I was unimpressed. Still amazed he made it this far. Adam and Christina played the game poorly.
iTunes should be incorporated into Facebook. Or Amazon via Facebook.
:( Must be the problem with Lara bars, not enough sugar (for sweet tooths).
Talent is God given. Be humble. Fame is man-given. Be grateful. Conceit is self-given. Be careful.
I am fixing to be immersed in Edward Tufte's "Presenting Data and Information" workshop.
Eewwwww! Just saw a family. Having a picnic. Disgusting.
I find that Gruner Veltliner cures cancer ===> : Alcohol kills virus, bacteria, right? (hint: I'm just looking for yesses)”
I'm always proud of you, sweetie! But yeah, I'm proud & jealous. ;)
At the end of the day it's just me, myself, and I so I put my happiness first.
how in the world did BC beat FSU?
hey can u get on here for a while? plz? thanks :D
laying here
Thanks to my new followers:
My daddy told me I can't go anymore because of ________
it's not how I define him. it's a fact and an observation of those facts. The historical evidence agrees with me.
My 1st exposure to the #AVENGERS was way back with ish 155. JAZZED to be here in for the northern California IMAX premiere!
what kind of hummus booooooooooooya and i got you you better be the hype man for me
so it's a litttleee sunny in Seattle. adventure time?
leego RT ": Let it all work out."
nobody really cares,
Can we meet at 10:30 instead of 10 today? I always misjudge traffic.
Ciao San Diego! Mangia Mangia will be serving dinner @ La Pravada apartment complex in La Mesa today from 5:30 to 7:30!
Lying on the bed crying. - Couldn't the Jazz win just one?!
crazy not all that much to do here thats why im a traveler
Today just feels like a "Grill in the Front Yard" type of day...oh and a use Hawaiian Rolls as buns day too.
Rude Boy is my life.
i'm jealous of everyone seeing the midnight showing of the avengers
Please tell me you put your Michigan pride to the side and at least picked MSU to make it out of the first round!
3C Is a company dedicated to coating a wide variety of materials like Vinyl,PVC,Metals, Wood and Concrete surfaces. 1512-722-6136
- THx, love. I wonder if we should start a #FashionFriday?
Woo congrats to Skrillex!
having a bachelor watching party Monday. We'll conference call you in. I'm giving out a first impression rose, so get ready.
Hate that is a HEAT fan :( since I have to cheer for the hometown, still love his music though ijs
Airborne particles from flushing the toilet can travel up to 6 feet. Where did you place your toothbrush?
That's understandable. Faith is for the hard times though :)
Good night to make buttermilk pancakes.
SWEET CHARITY Auditions Weds June 1st 6-9pm St Joseph Hospital 703 Main Street on 2nd Fl- Giggles Theater in Paterson NJ. # 914 751-1048
What's life without a little challenge?
okay I'm back, talk to meh
Hope you had good luck!
Okay, wearing my "Bazinga!" t-shirt because it's Thursday.
Little Bit Country Special Olympics Free Concert Sept 15,7 pm. Doors open @ 6:30 Donations accepted! Concession stand will be open
Breakfast at the gas station. :-/
Not giving a candy coated fuck cunt.
You are welcome Brianna!
When my computer works Ima spam my twitta!!!!!!
Wow, as much as I don't want to admit it, tonight's episode of Smash on NBC is awesome.
Those quiet people that you're dying to know more about.
yeah I'm straight. I'm on that same program! Been in the gym hard, but I gotta get that diet on point too!!
In a party mood forreal.. Been listenin to reggae all day! Lol
Dean "you're nuts!" RT Dean Kamen- his talk was truly inspiring- he is an American Treasure!
and accordionist Sergei Nirenburg will take you back to Paris. See you this Wednesday. Show starts at 7pm. No cover
Champagne is cliche... Milk is Indy!
I love Leap Day! Who is Ricky Berens?
Also for Dolph Lundgren's #StashHouse also started today! Both movies in Miami at Palace 18 . . .
are you copping those Questions at the end of the month?
Would this be an inappropriate time to ask what that is?
What's the rest of the world think of my WVU Mountaineers?
ha! you don't even have to ask. assuming there will be DIY fireworks, that is.
no his not!!
is your site not working or is it suppose to take you to other links?
I need a name for my "brewery". It's just homebrew but it seems like all the home brewers have a name. Ideas? Thoughts?
amazing voice great personality pay attention country radio or you will miss a star !
nothing. Just annoyed with men.
Pound The Alarm is pretty sick... Killed it.
We've got a table at #Spectrum2012 at #RIT Raffling a one year membership to WAB. Stop by!
It reflects poorly on me that you're my friend
Parked in traffic, trying to get to #sm4np in Seattle sometime today!
I've got your back! RT : i had the worst day ...sent home from work and now I'm CRYING AND UPSET !!!!
If someone breaks your heart just punch them in the face. Seriously. Punch them in the face and go get some ice cream
I just saw #fishlady swimming outside in a pool of #nastyjuices from under her arms.
I get to chill out some today !
Haha, too true!
S/O to a new follower and a friend
Oh dear.
whoooaaa i just a heard the new beat made. this dude stays pushing the boundaries. this don't even sound like him.
and he prob will for first 400 people, we need to get in the first 400!:)xx
It says it's still being processed :(
I wish y'all would have seen how I just flipped out Cus was on tv gasp for breath
So what point spread are you predicting we pound the Steelers by? Go
I guess the park didn't count as a try out?
<-----here RT : Where should I eat lunch in Seattle city center? What can't be missed?
with all that free time i have.
nice to e-meet you. go M's!
thanks for the beautiful words!
@ leah, phase of belief
Happy Birthday, Broski!
"Let's mow Sage's eyebrows" -Said By A Jerk.
Love when a teacher is so lazy niga rather give you same. Work everyday then work he already prepared.
Turn On The Lights Im Lookin For Her
Call that timeout❕
Does you car or truck need some TLC? Give us a call and set up an appt!!!!!
Anyone have good #MMA #knockout videos?
Happy Friday friends! Just come back from a refreshing 15km run. Hope you are all having a lovely morning
Forever wishing I could smile without it looking forced/retarded/creepy..
NIGGAS BEEN HAD MONEY BUT THEY HAD TO TELL ON NIGGAS TO GET IT WOW STOP IT PLEASE SHIT KILLING ME SWEAR
Gonna remove my twitter link from Facebook tomorrow. Confusing
I'm at work
Very glass half full of you!
Dat line damn
@ SteveRudinABC7 I just returned to the DP last week, 1st time in many months. Love it, miss it. Thanks for the rain today, we needed it!
OMG Scott the Alpha is too strong
On to the next one.
my name is ada. daniela? pretty ;)
Now: Eric Rosenberg, Department of Art & Art History, Tufts University #tinnitus (starting with photo of Buffalo Springfield)
You shouldn't have to say sorry for who you are. (: I'm sure your amazing<33
hey everyone, check out , you should definitely follow them for #Shop4Vasculitis coming up next month!
it's gonna be insane tomorrow! I have new bombs just got from Europe to play ;)
"Night time is really the best time to work. All the ideas are there to be yours because everyone else is asleep."
If your heart broken #DONOT listen to sad breakup songs! Makes it worse especially the songs "Unbreak my heart" and "Don't Speak"
I'm ready to get a job and to go back to school to get a Bacholars Degree.
Chop Chop Hack Hack
favorite place in the world is Mykonos! Has Jackie O's opened for the season? Cheers
Lord FatherSonSpirit God, I want you to have all of me always. Just have me as a tool in your hand or on your shelf.
Woke up today on a downer, today is going to be fun
Love my family!
Why people are upset that #MittRomney is building a beach house with an elevator? Most of his beach houses don't have elevators!
High Blood Pressure in Pregnancy
hi from Dallas
have fun and be SURE to get there early!
Get the scoop on the latest from from in a video I'm currently uploading. Standby!
So thankful for 👯
Hey! Thanks for the following Veronique :)
Awwwkwwwwward.... (Ha ha!)
All The Greats answered their most burning questions by focusing on their greatest fascination. What is your greatest natural fascination?
which one? i lived there ... geez, 10 years ago, now
#workaholics is some funny shit
lets go then buy ur ticket
#MentionYourCrush he's perfect, that's all.
77 % of shelters (more than 75%) indicate their clients stayed longer in their relationships due to the state of economy
sucks for you
Ok! , where would you recommend I rent a margarita machine? (Your opinion came recommended.)
I just don't wanna talk about it
Book orders from the suggestion box today. Lots of good ideas. Makes me sad when suggestion is a book we ALREADY own.
preaching to the choir here, boys. I'm interested in how you make that process more accessible to folks
With so many upsets how many #Sweet16 teams did you pick correctly?
Jim Dao, national correspondent for the , is speaking now about covering veterans and the military.
being mean gets you more attention just like when picking up girls...on twitter
A big thanks to and along with Tyler Ryan and Dan Sundam for the great storytelling tonight!
I PROPOSE A NEW WAR TO REPLACE THE IRAQ WAR "OBAMA" STOLE FROM US. #INVADETURKEY #rickperry love you Jesus!!!! lol
that only makes you as good at your job as Obama is at his.
Bonding with hot Australian about our crazy #SuperShuttle driver
nice catch on 1st down!
It's WHIRL WEDNESDAY! KDKA's own Dennis Bowman is featured during our segment today. Tune in at 9 to see why!!
Can't believe I almost got arrested for asking a question about he's girlfriend .. Lmfao smh
First day today! I'm exhausted! 23 kindergartners...whew my feet hurt, I always forget where we start from!
can't wait to see you at twickenham <3333
Order sent to Harley in Canada!
Get money, count money, get money
Ray who?
make sure to say hi after the show!
Lets go Mavs =]
Ridgewood Country Club
You got so much pride, until you look into my eyes.
Leather Feather will be somewhere in Oakland tonight. Watch yourself.
The key to safe sex is in the palm of your hand
hey tomoro is my birth day
Just a dash of cinnamon to almost anything...
Feeling no beuno
Hello Final Cut Pro X.
Wishing You A Happy Mothers' Day Weekend, PWI Family!
Congrats to Pam O and Joel A. Your tickets are at the cashier at Andrew Toyota. Sorry - not enough time to mail them out.
Derrick rose tore his acl and out for da rest of the yr Damn
Shout out to for following me.
its looks tight where can i get it 1-4-3
Loved today's LXTV Open House with Sara_Gore! Let the weekend projects begin.
Spend it all on me and my fuckin team.
RT : I really support Tough job. But has to lay down the law. Time to make the game MORE fair. RT if you agree.
I am not one that advocates for the burning of books but right now my anatomy and physiology book is asking for it!
An egg nog latte should not cost $5
ACC officiating is horrible
lmao. I have no clue. Whatever it is PhiPhiOShitty is definitely not fish. Maybe toad but not fish
Thanks! :) It did. We made etons oof eye contact but it didn't mean anything.
“We worry about what a child will be tomorrow, yet we forget that he is someone today
Finished my track! Excited, what is the best website to upload it to?
Let my love take you higher, cause i still turn to you.
you change it!
haha miss you!!
Jealousy........is a mental cancer.
Shout out to YOUR GREAT! everyone follow him... it wont hurt you just to press follow...
87 degrees in #STL. My office is on the 2nd floor of my house & I'm sweltering. Even the office dogs are panting. Is 4/2 too early for AC?
Thanks. She's got more pep than when she first woke, but still has a fever & cough. Hope it doesn't spread through the office!
Pickup Line: Is there a mirror in your pants? Because I can see myself in them.
How can you not sign me????? welp new team here i come...........stupid NHL 12!
Great Information Leading the Surge to Solve the World’s Energy Problems – SURGE Accelerator Begins Accepting Applications Today HOUS
#StraightEdge is for pussies. Fuck all you straight edge motherfuckers.
Looking for holiday events/parties in San Diego that can use photography and would like to help me support St Jude Children's Hospital!
Just had to vomit and flush my eyes cuz some led based paint fell into my mouth and eyes
Pumped for our new site launch!
RT : so here's my number...so call me maybe.
Rained all day in NoVA.... With April Showers like this, it had better bring some darned pretty May Flowers!!!
It's not to early to vote for the Kiss Hot 4! Tweet your votes and he will count them down at 4!
>>retired bad boys young lady!! Ha
Im not single, im in a long distance relationship, MY BOY FRIEND LIVES IN THE FUTURE >.<
Damn smh *look at ground with shame* kobe muhfugg y'all
Boutta head back to sleep for a hour or soo!! Haha
no... he's a douche... he was when i met him
Thanks for following lifecoachharbor! I have a Christ centered to help and inspire betrayed women near publication.
Key question: "Is current content being delivered in real-time, before consumer sees it before someone else?"
Twitter needs a report Spam button. Would make this ecosystem so much better!
these 13 wham hello rochester commercial are kinda creepy.
haha touche! Don't rain on my parade, Thomas :) How was your Derby weekend?
thx for the follow. Go USA and USMS!
Go hard in volleyball
you can still tweet but you can't read tweets -.- lol
Are you ever just sitting in church and just get the urge to twerk sum?
My sweater smells like kool-aid.
Thanks for the follow! Fanfara tonight woot!
Generally there's an underlying vulnerability that causes mortality.
These freshman need to go die and get kicked off the bus.
Hey sissy! How was your week?
yeah.. Whenever you hmu!
So it's always a judgment call. Likely the worst that would happen would be a takedown request.
i missed you;<3
SO LET'S SET THE WORLD ON FIRE~
RT I'm feeling scholarly today, so #FF to and , and for computational linguistics,
Chicken Butt didn't write back to me this morning 😔 I wonder why.
Hello ! Hope you're having a great weekend! Thank you for the shout-out.
Oh no! I was fond of the fat cat. :(
When you see a man opening a car door for a woman it can only mean 1 of 2 things. Either the car is new or the wife is.
As I start to share my blog with lots of new people, it sort of feels like letting the neighborhood go through my underwear drawer...
Not that anybody legitimately cares what I have to say. But just because I can.
not just today - everyday! RT : I win the crazy award for today, for sure. :)
lol yup u guys all miss me dont lie
follow back - we are a community magazine covering Newark and surrounding areas
soon to go to office, video presentation of BFI i will see later im looking forward to it it will be good. Love to all
most unconventional fun right now xD
RT What will the Netflix - Blackberry merger of worthless equals be called: BlackFlix or NetBerry?
Thanks again to Arianna #Huffington for mentioning us on The Daily Show! And thank you to Jon #Stewart for giving us such a great plug!
thnks u too
we'll miss ya tonight!!
i did
"" Relationships these days = 1 male + 1 female + 1 hoe +1 ex trying to mess it up and 1 friend secretly hoping it ends.””
Jeff McIntyre, Children Now, quoting MLK: you can't legislate morality, but you can regulate behavior
1977- #WoodyAllen & Diane Keaton starred in the film “Annie Hall”.
I'm tired of sub tweeters
Usually you need to get to the theatre an hour or so before the show and you fill out a small ticket and see if you get picked.
I swear I JUST did that lmao
I'm only gonna drink on nights I work .. wait that sounds bad..
Yes please! Can we hear your lessons learned?
hey... am 'twittering' for the first time...
Why what's up?
Oh no! I have a wasp nest by my front door!
Friday: Shot funny office industrial and they added an additional day, woo hoo! Saw "the social network" at DGA; loved twin rowers! :)
I guess Osama being dead pretty much seals the deal for obama's second term..well played
Thanks, Heather! :)
...Kavanagh says "You're a shite barman, but you're a great judge of poetry."
I think it's "'D' is for 'degree'". this is what I remember hearing during undergrad, anyway...
Or maybe "I still haven't found what I'm looking for."
Yea only keg. Didn't make much. Going thru fast. I'm going to try to bring some by later in week for you and Monda.
thank u so much. wow
9 times out of 10 if you live in America somebody had to go through some shit to get your ass here.
Nice to be home at this hour, January has brought some great blessings..I will
What's up with these celebrity feuds? You're celebrities, shut up and enjoy.
nope. why?
What happens when a sphere rolls through a box? IT'S A CUBE!
Youre all welcome btw.. RT Your car probably works because of
what is this "world" in John 17 that Jesus isn't praying for and the disciples don't belong to but are now sent to?
looks like the caps get one back. 2-1
If you can get your grandmother to call today or tomorrow and tell us a dirty joke, you can win tix to Judas Priest! 222-6000
Notre Dame blue/gold game....
Turning a heel is magic. Sock knitting is magic. Sticks + string = clothing Amazing!
How far east can you go before you're heading west?
Reminder: we're currently closed for maintenance. We reopen on February 14th at 9 a.m. We'll keep you posted with our progress!
Thanks so much for following me!
Such an awesome performance/talk about deafness. She made me laugh and smile so much!
#reduce #plastic #waste and bring #reusable #bags to the store with you. A quick tip to be #green!
I'm sure the guy driving by had a real good laugh when I walked into a tree branch with my face this morning.
let me get that info for you.
I know it wasn't you man who hacked ya?
Made me think of the 1st open at Bethpage too.
i'm sorry i'm sorry
I keep it real
How does fresh sea bass tickle your tummy, #Albuquerque #New Mexico? We have it!
Sending thoughts & support to Dallas. This is why we need AIA, AfH & all willing architects ready to assist!
I find it completely necessary to sing 'Gimme, Gimme' while I do the dishes.
Users may currently be experiencing some site issues; our engineers are working on resolving this issue.
Yes alarms are going off ):
#FF S/O to my. Fam got great things coming soon!! Check out his website! #RT &
i wouldn't be able to see my catch since I'm blind so Mexico it is!
Pause... i almost forgot i saw Yasmeen's ass on saturday until she popped up on my tl lol. Ahh, we were too faded..
Is it true that Samardo leads the league is sweatiness? Go #Cavs!
Would love to talk to you about this sometime. It's on my summer reading list for sure.
hardest working man in show biz, mr Pratt. Hang in there, sicko!! (ps autocorrect almost caught me at shoe biz)
Just watched "Chronicle". Not bad apart from the teen aspect to it. Nice to see familiar Seattle places :-)
OMG. You need a lawyer just to stay healthy.
same my eyes hurt all day and night
thinks it's wrong that only one company makes the game Monopoly
Sierman KB-NL: Interesting granular preservation policies: high level, intermediate, control-level
I know the feeling. RT : I wish I had more ears. There's so much music and so little time.
Great day! Dinner at Carnivore Milwaukee. Saw Danny Gokey. my client was super excited!
Running errands is expensive, this aspect of being an adult sucks!
Just completed a 30 min workout...2 workouts to go! with
Jus saw rick ross!
If your front toe sticks out your toms....its time for some new ones
Just got rear ended...
Is google down or is it just me...
#MLA - Tom Foxwell presenting new #AdamsRite locks to the association.
heck to the yes
#SonnyRollins, a living legend...
is co-producing a food truck seminar that covers planning, operations, branding, legal formation, financing, accounting, taxation and the p…
Ok where's my walkman? Had to get that out lol
Just mouth olive juice.
PLEASE FOLLOW-?-?-
Things a little slow up your way tonight, duder?
All new SUNDAY NIGHT LIVE WIT SOUNDS BY DJ KENZO. THE NEW AND NUMBA #1 College NightClub
"Why isn't there a special name for the tops of your feet?" ~Lily Tomlin
Goodnight 2 all my followers
You're welcome, Roxie!
our #motto will be: Don't hate me, cause you ain't me(; lololololol #swag #YOLO :D
That was run was horrible. Its not even hot yet either.
"Follow the path of the independent thinker. Speak your mind and fear less the label of "crackpot" than the stigma of conformity"
haha yeah people these days are cray! I'll be in NY Thursday!
they're cutting yetis now. Sh*t's gettin real
follow she loves you too death+she would be buzzing if she was your first follower+if not she will end up like stan.
Sent a text that was supposed to go to to twitter on accident. Could have been horrible. Good thing it was PG.
When a girl tells you about her problems, it doesn't mean she’s complaining, it means that she trusts you.
Yes, my fingers are crossed. How is your son doing?
So excited to check it out but your second link went to a GitHub 404 page... resend link?
Poor purple piano!! Yeah say that 7 times fast.
I love being a dick to McKayla.
Well im feelin somewhat better today
The #Celtics trail 66-61 going into the 4th qtr.. Watch how many elbows Ivan Johnson gives for the #Hawks I've counted 3 so far
Shannon on AI just sang a Kathy Troccoli song!! Go light your world!! Awesome!!!
Tried 2x to start Game of Thrones series, but no time to finish. One of these winter days...
There will always be a "lie in believe, an "over" in lover, an "end in friends, an "us" in trust & an "if" in life.
That's odd, given that he's sitting here in my office at in Seattle.
looking like pictures will (hopefully) go up tomorrow night.
I'll be there along with I understand the traffic thing though.
Nothing right now really dont feel good anyway
#Somepeopleneedto Talk to us, We can help
So be it! I'll text you when I'm leaving "The Noods."
Perfection! RT : Chicken soup, sweat pants and catching up on #Girls on a rainy Tue night w/
“A Minute with Maxwell” Free Daily Coaching from: www.johnmaxwellteam.com Sign up to get them every morning! Inspirational
“: When your #work speaks for itself, don't #interrupt. -Henry J. Kaiser”
Awesome! Is 10/11 in your 'unidentifiable europe available?? So much amazing work...was hard to chose
Not surprised the Giants are winning, they just want it more..... bastards
best way to cook pig heart?
": After you have felt what I have, you'll know why I'm like this."
Aging to Perfection - Eating for Healthy Aging - San Angelo Standard Times
I'm a fucking walking paradox, no I'm not
hey thanks I'll follow them thanks to you
Can't wait to see The Avengers tonight! WOW IT was hard not listening to all the talk about it the last few days
Happy Mother's Day to all the mothers but especially to my wife Sherri, the best wife & mother in the universe! I married way above me!
Have you ever wondered if your mom had just got done giving your dad a blowjob right before kissing you goodnight? If not, you are now
I want to know what is in season!
Packing my bags for
Reorganizing my room! :D
Cascades maintenance came by...finally. But, Eric was SUPER nice! Cabinet and fp are both fixed.
Lol He Just Gonna Laugh Watch I'm Serious
Thinks I should have rowed to work!
Home sick with the dog, Annie, and the laundry...
Good Morning tweeps! Listening to French radio to set the tone for my day.
I think we're about the same size...
ready for ya book club!
Currently following an arsenal of filmmakers and videographers!! Follow us back!! And say Hi!
stop what you are doing and take a time out!!!
I am looking for someone who is currently doing a TEFL course. If you meet the description them email me at
not sure how you can justify 1b though.
I'd call Spotify a good example of viral membership, yes, making sure to retain the negative connotation of 'viral' :-)
I wish! But next week definitely.
Happy Friday Everyone!
Help out a #sojuca camper → MT Calling all #illustrators - who wants to design a quick poster for print & html email?
I enjoyed meeting you, and then ambushing you with a frequently asked question. :)
Ah there it is, my fave holiday quote: "Christmas ain't Christmas til somebody cries." Amen Donkey!
Feeling sick--what DID they put in that punch?!!
Happy hump day & thanks gorgeous new followers
Thanks for the RT, Megan!
I am fearfully and wonderfully made!
What's the site about?
Zach Zolman beats Luis Chalas by split decision.
I've been longing for a North Park bagel shop for over 10 years. You're no help.
Not Country Joe and the Fish?
Gosh, I was a stupid freshman.
#librarians - anyone got data on whether getting an insti. membership to e.g. increases the number of faculty publishing in PLOS?
The neighbors know his name ;)
I just finished a 2.02 mi run with a time of 14:50 with Nike+ GPS.
Why do you insist on being stupid and annoying?
Sure, will do!
#TheHermanCain is now referencing #Pokemon movie but I am mesmerized by the clock over his shoulder...14:58 14:59.....FIFTEEN MINUTES!
Everything reminds me of you...
Sitting in hampton roads traffic, richmond tied up too. Tough day. Long ride home tonight.
BLOWING DOUGH DOUGH WIT MY NIGGAZ ON THE WEST SIDE. I'll RIDE WIT MY NIGGAZ DAAWWGG
Recruiting a corp #librarian in #DC! Must have MLS and tech services exp. Contact me at !
im following u (: follow back ? (: and i <3 ur name by the way (:
Thanks for the follow, Joey
I can just feel it. Lolol and the video comes out todayy
Slide through the shop 9th and Washington! Just drove by in that red Ferrari. We see you!
wins appeal!! come celebrate !! $2 half pound burgers till 10 and $2 shots from 8-close!!
I thought I was the only one with that problem!
Currently being micromanaged from across the continent.
Happy Birthday to former Blast goalkeeper Dave Kern!
#Knicks should trade Melo and Baron Davis for Pau Gasol. Would be perfect.
Social Media 101 - Watch the 4 minute video by Socialnomics and join the revolution www.easysocialnow.com
Attending- In Conversation with David Weekley-Founder of David Weekley Homes of St. Thomas Houston-7:00PM
Glad you like it! We are really proud of Ampersandbox, and it was great to work with
Whoop there it is..RT : 40 Oz Night tonight at 240 E Pittsburgh. Dont Be A Menace and Friday on the big screens!
After watching this Shane Mosley fight from last Saturday, Shane needs to go ahead and retire. He's a hall of famer. Now hang it up...
I'm sad you've been quarantined :( we've got alot of time to make up for! Chill seshh outside of work asap (:
I'm thinking about having a bonfire one night, and invite people over. Hmm.. Gotta pick a good weekend to do it.
most ripped off lyrics in 60 seconds ever.
Never skipping skoo
No chruch in the wild!!!
Peter Ustinov~ By increasing the size of the keyhole todays playwrights are in danger of doing away with the door.
heading to NYC this weekend for design retreat/meetings... then taking in Early plays Sunday
I gotta find something to wear
Enjoying amazing Olive Oil ice cream from while watching City-United. Marathon recovery is god...
Supposed To Be Gettin My Hair Cut ... Idk Though
Thank you for the follow!
Wow. Steve Jobs died.
Consuul at revolt summer surf series out at crystal pier in Pacific Beach! Come hang out with us!
RT : MDOT grant would fund new bikes lanes on Trumbull - Warren to Holden. #Detroit looks to close gap - Warren to...
Patricia, thank you for the RT's!
Research-supported strategy, clear & useful #content, respect for our clients. All good.
that was the biggest smile I've had this morning. Thank you. :D
have you ever seen Eastbound and Down? I promise that's worth DLing!
Oh no!!! I hope your husband is okay.
Super geeked for #tattedtuesday ! 💙💙💚 ink my whole body I don't give a muthaaaaaa what
This is an Official Tweet for National Poetry Month, a National Poetry Tweet if you will ...
": Mayer Hawthorne is the best station on Pandora. #np - Ben E. King - Stand by Me" I am 100% in agreement with this statement.
I'm happy for you.
Seeing some tweets saying that the softball size piece of concrete was thrown at the vehicle. Officials have not determined that yet.
Your friend wanted me too, that's why he can't stand me (;
I hope days come easy and moments past slow & each road leads u where u want to go, my wish for u is that this life becomes all u want it to
2012 film watching! #54. 21 Jump Street (Lord, Miller, 2012). Great comedy, i loved it. Great chemistry between Tatum and Hill.
Yes, it must take quite a bit of work, time, & energy! Not to mention post-shooting editing & processing.
love you!!!
Agreed -- I think the "I am a photographer" story was an elaborate ruse. Our stuff may be gone later.
no brainer upgrade over VDN. the team needs defensive coaching badly.
is it raining in Los Angeles, California
I loved the book! Amazing. Can't wait to see the film.
Wow that Bryz trade not looking so good now jeez
#JamieOliver warm rocket salad perfect #valentinesday !
We humans- all livin n a huge black hole. As we try 2 find da way 2 light, we often stumble upon rotten pumpkins, n mystical forest animals
NBA Star and Miami Heat player LeBron James hosting club Shadow Room tonight in Washington DC
If I said I wont your body now would you hold it against me
I'm not lost, I'm just temporarily unaware of my current location.
#ff (Thank you all for the recent follows!)
Hate it when men try to spit game real men dont spit game because they are to real to even play games smh follow me and I will follow u back
That was sort of my thinking. But really it was just the candy part of my brain thinking, not the rational part.
love this!
your welcome!(:
Bruins hangover freudian there on the "draft pucks." Rather than a boner, I feel like I stopped getting punched in the face
Tampa police arrest habitual burglar
Hi Drew- give them a call at the store- they will be happy to help you.
Thank u I was blessed with good genetics but If I fall off I can easily look like a malnourished #TerrellOwens lol
Turkeys in LOVE Park John DeBella of WMGK hosts his 10th annual Turkey Drop to gather food and cash for the hungry.
sleepytime. big day tomorrow.
And the Beta Chapter wraps up for the semester. Many successes. We can't wait till Spring 2011!
design-software.eu » Blog Archive » Guide to the Unified Process ...
College fair tonight til 9 PM at the Poland Springs Arena in Toms River. Great chance to visit 100+ colleges including Winthrop University.
Ain't no mountain high enough, ain't no valley low enough
Coffee is a heavenly drink. The person responsible for its creation should have been awarded.
Going to school super early tomorrow :D Just for him(:
is that why you were sitting on the court when we started?
Jamie looks like Madame Defarge, furtively making notes in his little "old-school journalism" pad.
The cp3 era was great. No losses and a whole lot of drama. Bring on Dwight
Well they went out
Got a call a couple of weeks ago about a big stash of 45's in Iowa, went to Iowa today and found out what 6,000 Polka 45's look like.
New ConsumerBase Beauty Industry Lists Now Available on Website - San Francisco Chronicle (press release)
Oregon wins the Orange Bowl...Miami is rocking for the Ducks tonight!
Rebecca Blacks song #Friday on #Glee ! xD oh Hell yeah, that's what's up.
is so pretty
I have this aversion to being one of my students' step-mom.......lol
Um...yeah IDC.
DAM HEY WHATS LONG TIME SO ARE U AND URS STILL GOIN THRU IT
And he's just getting started!! APDTA!!
didn't care much for the fencing?
Welcome back to our hood, Mike!
lmfao dude my graduation speech is not as bad as I thought it would be (; & MAY 22 is one directions first concert here (;
In the future instead of saying "hey toot your horn", people will say "tweet that baby"
"I used to think I was paranoid but not anymore. People would ask me to removed my cell battery just to talk." - Carter
where are you working now?
I really need to stop drunk calling and texting people when I'm drunk 0_0
International hug a bosnian day
- Hey Trae....I'd like to talk about this film in NOLA...need an extra producer. Check your FB and Hot-mail Charlie
Thanks for the DM, but I can't DM you back cause you have to follow me to do that.
Ok guys. My twitter hiatus starts now....
I just felt a moment of "I don't care" again. This has been happening a lot the last few days. I guess I'm over and above it.
Police have suspect in Oakland school shooting.
and i want to reiterate that John's book is tremendous and works great in classroom (imho)
I'm out of chocolate. This is unacceptable.
Willie Street CoOp is a great grocery store for organic
Classic thinking is all about "what is". Future thinking will also need to be about what can be.
Yo forward to our kiddos playing basketball in a few hours...May the best team win! :) #itson! :) (CC: )
I feel so dumb.
I made $11,000 working on sets in 2010 & you don't see me with 'actor' or 'check for me on tv' in my bio.
Thank you!
Don't feel bad, I didn't know either!
And...up the hill I go.
Just moved the car up past the sidewalk. This lightning and thunder reminds me of storms in the Midwest when the tornado sirens would go off
I wish I could help my BestFriend feel better. This week just ain't for her.
Oh, and though you hardly need me to tell you, The Avengers was awesome.
#IfYouWereMineI'd treat you like a princess, talk to you like a best friend, do my best to make you happy, and be a man 💘 (and kiss you) 😘
Completely understood there...I may be off soon as well from here.....
$15.5 billion is sort of like the ultimate beer goggles, though.
Wedding was a BLAST!!!!! Did the Wobble with my best friend! ;D
“We are what we repeatedly do; excellence, then, is not an act but a habit.” — Aristotle
the other thing you could do for mother's day is watch Kazuo Hara's Extreme Private Eros Love Song 1974
Seriously LOVE #2BrokeGirls BEST SHOW EVER!!!
he signed my tattoo and I just started crying. He was so impressed with it
Now that he plunked Bryce Hot Dog Harper, Cole is okay in my book. Not that it matters but there will be no more Princess chatter from me.
yee that's what i was gonna ask & sorry for the bother :)
gloss up Freddy Couples, that dude is amazing every year at Agusta
my sister wants one too here name is Riley I hate her -.-
geno's is awesome
I can't do this anymore.
i sorry...I usually text first but ya know my teams going far right now...love you hubby
so many people swear by it but I am starting to despise it. I feel like I miss so much and im late on all responses
Hi new twitter peeps!
haha ya..sry I had to eat
need to learn that
Thanks Michael! Say hi to everyone for me ;)
Do you wash your car by hand or take it through a car wash?
All your ever gunna be is mean! :)
Agreed! And more seriously, I hope that the presentation went well.
just sent you a message via f/b too
Nothing like hot soup on a cold day.
White tulips, a get well card, dinner, meds, and now a kiss and tuck-into-bed. Somebody LOVES me, somebody LOVES me.
Thank you so much for your support :)
Stuidy break ... watching "Every Little Step" with Mike Tyson & Wayne Brady on FunnyorDie.com
follow #DallasPinterestParty for live tweets and pins!
I wish I could go to playlist live, I want to meet so bad!</3
No one can rock chachimomma's better than Chachi and Justin Bieber! <3 I better see him wearing them soon <3
Apparently fans are yelling WHAT?! My only question...WHY?!
Moderation is a virtue only in those who are thought to have an alternative.
the girl with the smile, is the best actress I have ever met.
yeah I was tired when i did the review
Thanks for coming in to visit us. Looks like you have a lovely herd! :)
would u follow back
Merry Christmas to all and too all a good night
wishing my best guy and awesome birthday.
I called & blasted earlier, then checked. oops. Had to leave an apology message. It is good we praise the good votes. Training.
#Kentucky has only won 1 football national championship. In 1950 they went 10-1 and shared the title with Oklahoma, Princeton, and Tennessee
I mean ! haha , also, good luck at erzberg !
"You give them a taste of catfood, soon they come back for the whole cat." -Dwight K. Schrute
tomorrow is my friday!
Knock Knock. Who's there? Samuel L Jackson. Now open this motha f*&$in' door before I kick your head in!
cause they stupid
Goodnight c:
Today is the day I knock it out of the park! (although I would be satisfied with crossing it off my list).
Check out my last tweet... Just getting started!
Go 2 bathroom game&when I return kids r holding paper&pens, I waved,they got mad.I walked back&asked y-they thought I was GBs ARodg!
geez I try to be nice and I get rudeness.. I hope it kills you slowly hahaha
i wanna go but idk if i should
Client development meetings today.
“: #musepub2012 Davis outlines data and downloads of articles on Muse Fascinating longevity of humanities articles
365 days is 1 year.. except for this year. This year has 366.
yes, it gets angry when it sits for too long, besides the heated steering wheel will be perfect for today's chilly weather. :)
The Reach of the Conservation DistList: I receive @ 9:27pm. By 9:50, 83 visits to a URL posted on my behalf. Thanks
A drummer is a musician's best friend. (from a Martin Mull album)
OK iPhone users - how do I FORWARD a spam text to SPAM
got an email about this (us supporters are special) but I didn't wanna spend $30. Sorry Obama.
got our swanky new Business check card in the mail. Name on it and 'ervthing.
thank you...
ok, this hummus is awesome. Trader Joe fan.
sometimes happens when you're dehydrated--drink lots of water and keep your feet lower than your heart!
Hahaha.! Bus was live today.(:
Coyote Ugly my fav!!
I GOT MY 1D HOODIE TODAY IN THE MAIL!!!!! Yay ya!
#np New Order - Crystal (:
Thanks. Me, too.
i love this half time show!!!!!
Free coffee in S5 if you want it...
Lol I'm amused my darling. :')
is jist beong gay shittin in old peoples mouths
Paper=10. Victoria=0. Conclusion: start earlier.
Mom told me she's going back to school..
"CASUAL WORK ATMOSPHERE" We don't pay enough to expect that you'll dress up.
If you want to work from home ill show fastest way to succeed at Oxygen4Energy simple #: 712-432-3066 ACCESS CODE: 970467 FEB 8TH 9 PM EST
“: I am across the street...”😱 come on than.
Weekly Poll: BlackBerry App World Accepting PlayBook Apps - Are You Building One?
anti beard nest
When clients & the world truly learn the "REAL WORLD" of Public Relations...we'll all be a lot better off
getting married means you've found someone you want to have sex with forever, it isnt deep but it's true
as with u!
I'll be at Fox5DC studio w pitchfork and torch before frigging post-game ends! This is insane!
Congrats to and on their 40 under 40 nods!
The brain is an amazing organ. It works 24 hours a day, 365 days a year from birth until you fall in love...
Thanks for following me, !
waxing philosophic are we?
yay(: so ready.
can I stream that ish online? I'm in the Mil
Watching my boy do what he loves most! #basketball :)
Cannot believe Junior Seau is gone. Very upset right now.
Reminder, Tomorrow, Monday, Oct. 3 4-6pm, Michael Chorost, "Cyborg Theory and Practice" Lecture in New North 204, Co-sponsered by CCT...
...i thought about it.
We've been in Missouri for over a week working on Kent's mom's house. Having a pretty good time.
Masyia dumb ! Aha .
Im reading Heist by Kiki Swinson
Give respect & you get respect :)
Caught a ride on Discovery this morning
all I hear is talk.
I'm really enjoying Chunks! It's so addictive. Great job! :-)
My class is K-2. My kid is 12. If I don't see "my kids" during summer, I'm going to miss them like mad.
I second you and WF, Katrina...Lived and worked there from '91-'98 - warehouses, factories, driving...
oh you know that's why
DAM!!!!!! ILL LOSE MY MIND.. ILL TWEET U TO COME BABYSIT LMFAO HAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA
Thanks Steve. Your leadership style was absolute, but your sense of artistry, technology, and user intuition will be forever unparallaled.
that's what the hell I'm talking bout...
So if we're replacing dead musicians with holograms does this mean we can do away with Sublime with Rome?
nothing much chillin that's all how about u
also who makes an exam which the historical average is 40%. doesn't that throw up some red flags
hahahahahahaha. so, mulder went to the blanket basket and pulled out his snuggie. officially, its wintertime.
Just wanted you to know that you seem like a complete gentleman, and whatever girl you get is very very lucky to have you.
Who's excited about the NBA starting back up? Me!!!
I know but I have to study
At joes crab house, enjoying brunch. Koolbeans start to the weekend
Oddly enough, I leave a lot out of tweets here. Limited subject material. It would feel good to have a fresh start I think?
On my way home from camp! 😁
If you didn't already know, #Brewers play #Cubs at 2pm on WGN. Now you get to see what I see!
I like that plan ;)
Drake just asked me for my number.
Hi Nicole. Thanks for the follow.
... I Love the piercing you have near your eye- Did it hurt!? And how long did it take to completely heal?
I'm thinking Witch Doctor for Diablo I.
we all know the way to gain is to follow! RT for that good ol' follow
Read more learn more change the globe
S/O to my newest follower <3
I had never seen the video until they spoofed it on Saturday Night Live...that made the video interesting!
want me to bust in? that should get you an F!
text me.
RT : The Avengers was so good definitely 4 stars 🌟🌟🌟🌟
WHUT?! Pusha T is gonna be in the ICT? Heck Yes!
Great day in #tallahassee today - more committee meetings tomorrow. Stay tuned for more info on my bills!
Have you ever noticed that your praying tapers off when you have a guilty conscience?
Don't forget about Mail Monday this week! Send an email to
Love is good!
I'll know the answer to that in a little bit, I will get back to you
Happy Birthday!
hahaha!!! He would snap at small children!!
my other life.. trying to stay humble about it but you caught me.
we all need to be humbled from time to time. It's what makes us work harder for what we want in life. Keep ur head up buckets
RT Trust me when I say that there is no better place or school on the planet than the University of Cincinnati You'd love it
Metta just knocked down collision & harden like if it was cake!
Great 2 see the Steelers utilizing all of our offensive weapons including the Slant Pass plays & Polamalu is back! Looking good 4 playoffs!
Well, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think the 10% rule only applies if there IS a final during finals week, too.
achieving #WorkBestie Status today was a milestone in my book.
We don't know who the next #sdmayor will be, but we've sure loved working with & are grateful for his support.
RT "You must of been in the club" : He messy
Oh God, Your On Your Own Lol
I seriously had this water on the stove for over a hour... And its still not boiling!
Strawberry Banana<3
When I google my name Treys website comes up im cool
well if u don't like that show then don't bother tuning in tomorrow.
How did you post to twitter with G+?
Beyondthescoreboard.net this Chris Paul move may pay off quicker then I expect for the
thays what I do and she cant yell at me for it! :-)
Sporting News: Kawhi Leonard receives one first place vote and finishes 4th in the ROY voting.-wp
damn near forgot abt that track
Pigeon Pecks? There you got Picks but the pun to boot.
Not sure what you mean. Your JSON serialized should be quoting the names. Which one are you using?
seriously great question: why has "God" never answered an amputees prayers for their limb to grow back?! That would indeed be a miracle...
Havent been on twitter for a month I think....feel so lost Dx
I'm on my level
Spent some time with the Lord of War today. Such a smart guy. Always a pleasure.
please add a seattle tour! #Bring1DtoSeattle 49
Go Colts! Good start! I hope they keep it going!!
What's going on tonight people?!?!
Awesome Artful day at ArtWalk on the Street! We are Thankful for the sun! Check out ArtWalk venues on Sunday 12-5pm!
...but what it would mean to say it is 'real' or 'fake'?
bender poppin pills
Numerous Time Pickles Equals 3 Cats And @ Mouse
#Amen!!! So glad you're here! The youth can still do it! We're about worship!
Yo next time i need major permanent!
sent wines from & John Duval for Wine & Roses. They'll be pouring wines at the Tasting too! Thank you!
bc your a loosa duh!!
This sunburn on my chest is killing me 🔥
Im definitely voting for Rated Next Generation!!
Bout to be a good night
Don't let life pass you bye...without seeing all the things you should be ♥grateful♥ for...
How Soylent Green Was My Valley
Dinner tonight staring my sister's birthday kick off.
I wish I was British. British accents are attractive. ;D
It's on days like this I wish I had air conditioning. Not looking forward to coming home to a 115 degree house tomorrow.
Who talks on the phone nowadays.. Really..
image in by Justin - should be up shortly. Also I'll try to get links to photog pages on the slideshow soon.
At English Ales. If dude finds my mug it'll be a fucking miracle.
Me neither. I thought Rue was absolutely perfect (sob!). Cinna too.
Officially going to record 2nd project in Apr at Sharkbite Studios *LIKE*
Eating my way SAFELY thru the Food Allergy Conference! Yum! presentation GREAT JOB!
Florida State trustee may have lit the fuse on a potential move to the Big 12 - YAHOO! Found on Bing
We will pack #china with an ad attached inside billions of
Urgent client request cancels my trip to VMworld...bummer. Always glad to help though. Will be looking for good information from you all
may as well throw marketing in the count
keep calm and LOVE WOOL.
Hunger Games tickets at the IMAX?
It's a holiday tomorrow, but we're still working ... and our service call fee is still just $29!
Haha, well played! But you leave #ChickenRun out of this!
It's instagram for me too right now especially since the images can be syndicated to fb & twitter
Red Sox have short list of candidates
": Accolics Love Candice. For the wonderful barbie vampire and one of the sweetest person on this Earth." :)
ha ha I bet he will be a vegan eating tree hugging lover black dude calling to defend them homos
We're totally getting really weird with sometime soon.. like... baby oiling each other for gang vocal sessions.
Awesome! We love having you fine gentlemen!! ": - Love being part of the familia! :)"
#Soccer training for the boys tonight. 6-7:30 session only.
no where except scandalizing d students.
Trendsetter will be Tweeting live from the floor of this afternoon so put on your play clothes! (Are those still a thing??)
1.How's It Like To Be Famous ? 2.Favorite Type Of Music 3.Favorite Celebrity ? 4.What Inspired You To Keep Dancing? :) 1O
Are there movies other than the avengers?
I definitely will babe
Devote a great deal of time talking to buyers in person. You'd be dazzled what number of companies do not listen to their buyers.
ducks ducks ducks ducks, quack quack quack quack, zoom.
I get to go home, unpack, pack, then drive to west palm tonight. I'm starting to miss my room in Orlando right about now 😞
Do you know long it takes google+ to send an invite after someone submits it for you? I still haven't received mine yet.
COME PARTY WITH THE HOTTEST COLLEGE FEMALES IN YOUR CITY AND LADIES COME PARTY WITH THE BALLERS THE POINT NIGHT CLUB
Rev. Stewart - This is the most important legislation on immigration in our nation of our generation.
You need new suits since you started CrossFit getting all sexy ;) haha
go to church u fake loser
New artistic discoveries #art #fine art
Seeing # "Reanimator" at the Hayworth! 2nd time - great show!
Conflict happens in life no matter what you do. It means that you are doing the right thing to grow. You just have to deal positively!
I Need A Hug
I'm so excited to see your music video when it come out. is a good producer
Hey Christopher! I mean I take initial ideas and construct framework, develop creative and pave the way for successful results.
Thanks to who first turned me on to "Ordinary Affects," when I was starting to write my book on airports...
5 more hours to my next class bout to go home and go night night
Merry Christmas Baby
ministry: raised funds for 3 netbooks for the underprivileged youth and gave them away at the San Diego Christmas Celebration!
God does the extraordinary through our ordinary prayers.
hahaha yup, always happy to laugh with someone over bob and david.. i always do the van hammersly when playing pool at studio
Mindset is critical to success. Most do nothing to enhance theirs.
Outstanding Achievement Award - Dawn Penn
i think pm. yeah pm
god I love that dog!
got it haha
I just smelt tpot and she has bad B. O today
Game isnt close early, but Stu Douglass is nice to look at
i have so many dents on my head, i think my mom dropped me as a baby or something cause my head is like deformed
Trunkis R the best. A place 4 all their things & a ride-on toy. Exhaustion from zooming the ramps at airports is an added bonus
Was that a Scalabrine chant?
When the pressure gets on I turn clutch. Just call me the Black Mamba
Shoutout to a great friend for the penn station hookup
Drinking rose in the summer isn't fashionable anymore?!?
welcome to los tuiteres....
Our most "senior" instructor turns 60 years young today - for life!!! Happy Birthday Cindy :-)
lucky you!
its on you invitation .
"Are you going to get a smoothie?" is my least favorite combination of words, and I like getting smoothies!
Take to #ATasteofFashion tomorrow evening to be stylish and safe! $10 off to and from the event.
Headed to Indy
Parkrose Dance Team is washing cars today til 4. Parkrose Hardware & Middle School. Helps dancers go to camp and pays fees.
I have a bunch of homework. Can I do it over there ?
Lopez looks good; is he playing better due to a contract coming up? He looks in better shape than he did to start the season.
i hate being so sensitive
I LOVE YOU TOO BBY.
RT : And is warming up the crowd nicely ;) #Vegas http:// plixi.com/p/52122990
Checking out old beats I made from years ago...
I think G+ has done a wonderful job of merging the two IMO.
Move over Al Gore, is
Im Tryna Get To That Next Step & The Only Thing Thats Stopping Me Iss.. I Need A Studio!!!!
did you figure out the link paste thing yet? that can't be right.
Really enjoyed #pantherspulse!! Check it out!
Today has been one stressfull day!!! Im ready to kick back watch a movie and relax :)
I am thinking about getting a Mercedes-Benz C 350 Sport for a new car!
no its jus the truth
Trying to work while watching dumb movie on cable.
classic times at
Movements happen one-at-a-time between people, you can't rely on a "giant list" and expect people to act
haha I didnt think so. Have fun. Hopefully theres a riot.
I like tha brew w/eyes on prize & politically correct i wish yuni would just overthrow tha shit outta prince & hit larussa dead in tha mouth
San Francisco's #1 post production audio facility for over 15 years is now on Twitter!
Cool. Like I said, I didn't know the full context of your comment. It wasn't personal but I won't jump in again.
lol im tryna get on here more so you'll def star seeing my name a lil more lol
Where can a playa get a bindi? I need answers from people who actually have them.
whoa, are you working the show tonight?
your the baddest chick on BGC
one of our employees, Rosie, is participating in the Susan G. Komen Race for the Cure on Oct. 15th. this is what inspired her to...
aye you mad!?! Chhhiiilllllllllll thirsty was hot
Its sad when you see a friend who was you're best friend now be a total diffrent bitch then the bitch you loved...
The one who finds you when no one's looking..
I'm looking to do something random for NYE
Coming soon: Romney instructs all to avert their eyes from Breitbart report.": Audio: Romney repudiates... Rev. Wright attacks
30 people unfollowed me. Yeah, i feel the love -____-
Wow Caps, way to choke
I'm watching a thing about downtown Pittsburgh, this makes me more excited to move there for college! :)
May 22: Harp Quintet in C Minor by E. T. A. Hoffmann #ICA’s Marguerite Lynn Williams is the principal harpist of the Lyric Opera of Chicago!
true“: Everything is funny..........until it's you.”
yay etsy/twitter/facebook buddies! we've achieved the trifecta!! and one more thing - check your DMs!! ;)
Real friends don't read your blog; they read what people wrote in your comments.
Stupidity is a talent for misconception
I'm talking tonight at 930 on I can only assume they're doing a "World Series Preview" show.
Lol! Naw.. I just walked out on they ass. Like, no warning or nothing. Went to lunch and never returned.
Olympic 4x100 final will be rocking ---> “: and the entire final eight under 49. #deep”
UK has scored more points than UL and Michigan State combined last night!
Dun done it.
I saw snooki the one and only....
I'm tired.
you must have missed game one
Live a life of purpose. When you run out of reasons to be happy, turn your gaze to those who loves you dearly.
I need sushi pronto ..
Where did we come from maybe it can be found in the Afar Rift by
RT : When hoeing in the garden under the hot sun, pant or sigh for some one to call--come, let's have a cocktail. KY1911
what if it was bad and the family hates you?
RT : The spread of the 49 Fire has been stopped. Crews will mop the area through this evening.
One of those poems has just been accepted somewhere! I'm thrilled :) Several others are also out as subs.
Yes I did see that. I was lamenting not having nascar friends bc no one on FB was talking about #daytona500 when I saw this.
I want to go to Cheesecake bistro
Strength does not come from physical capacity. It comes from an indomitable will. -Mahatma Gandhi
STEELERS & EAGLES FANs...COMEDOWN & ENJOY THE GAME WITH US AT LOFT47!!!
Perpetual Groove at the Beachland Ballroom tonight! Doors at 8:30, show starts with us at 9. See you there!!!!!
Question of the day: What is your favorite kind of Halloween Candy?
Connection, consistently and credibility are key. Deliver integrated messages across all channels.
Needed to mow the lawn today. Doesn't look like it's gonna happen. I don't enjoy doing it, but I do like a groomed yard.
If you received a message from me, please ignore it!! I got hacked
Awesome, really looking forward to it! RT Totally look forward to have you on any weekends :)
So. Castle tonight. There was shaking. And crying.
Thank you for the #FF shoutout! I hope you have a wonderful and fun weekend.
Happy Birthday to my favorite fiancee !
It's time 2 kick my bitch's ass back in gear
Neurobiology, Organic Chemistry B, and Mathematics for Neuroscience on my plate for next semester
today already really sucks.
They're unisex!
thanks for the rt
That is why activation through mobile is a huge trend we will see in 2012: Google Goggles, QR codes, Shazam
Be a pharmacist in Chicago. We gotz pharmacyz
Rockhurst University has a beautiful campus
This is about to be one hell of a game .
Watching #PressPausePlay for the first time. I know, I'm super late to the party.
Props to for being able to pull a last-minute #drupalcon session out of his you-know-what.
this plus, people think there is a 'correct' response and fear their impulses are wrong.
Alcohol. Fuels the desire, kills the performance.
I'm going to be traveling on #FreeComicBookDay and don't think I'll be near a comic book shop! Oh no! Help.
People now a days uurrgg
Now I'm speechless, over the edge and just breathless. I never thought that I'd catch this, love bug again 
Thank you Beth :) So glad you liked it.
DVR is the best
RT : just spit mad #bars in Portuguese [at with Loud Apartment]!!!
Today won't stop getting worse. Even my dog died.
Feeling kind of gassy. It would surely be a death sentence for us all.
Really sad about Sam's uncle right now. So glad we got to see him in July.
It's not really a big deal. I just thought it would be nice to capture the good ol' days of being young, beautiful, in love
coral springs charter
So, now that I have said my piece on the horrible schedule of the LHSAA, I would like to say Good Luck to ALL teams participating! Great Job
Mhm. Okay. I don't really care to discuss this anymore, because obviously Anthony is a douche to you. We've established that.
stop you guys. What if they aren't having sex. Thought these people were your friends
I'm serious....
Harrison Ford~ Nothing shocks me. Im a scientist.
I don't know beiber!
I just sent the script in to a producer of Green Lantern and Casino Royale to consider producing with me as I direct. Update in 2 wks.
thanks for the follow and I am always up for an inspiration. Gratitude has been key to my life transformation
Hey , you just brought two new beers to our party! Welcome to Mellow, White Rascal and Joe's Prem. Amer. Pilsner
Who remembers when manalapan was going on in jersey? #SummerComeBack I wasnt even there but i remember watching the videos(:
considering the backlash IRS (or any gov't agency) would likely get by hiring someone(s) like us to handle UX, i'm not surprised
Come on Mojo Jojo... Lets cuddle!
country music artist myspace
I'm not the smartest duck in the water but Quack!
R.I.P to the children who lost their lives today in the horrible bus accident here in Palestine. Very very sad
Thanks for the RTs, follows & mentions!
sitting tight watching the emergency alert system interrupt Ancient Aliens every 10 mins
Talking bout pussy.
transparency is the first rule of social media
10 out of 15 pages. Why does it feel like I have so much more to go?
So am I going to see you at Ally's shower in a couple weeks?!
yes... I occasionally poke my head in here. :)
I've never had a migraine but I think my very first one hit me during that exam. No idea what I wrote.
I smell pumpkin soup
Pure awesomeness!
The weekend is never quite long enough is it? What gets you through your Monday?
Was equally a pleasure to meet you. Stick with this event organizing thing-your projects will only grow in stature and importance.
haha damn it I was hoping you could help me choose a fave. And we are having 7 cans. I'm really sick. Snot. Everywhere.
oh, hi porn spammers. get on it!
Adding some cool things to my ning networks- you can sign in using google, facebook and add all the nings to seesmic desktop!! I'm such a g
Today was a great day! I learned new things about my craft... It's always a good day when I learn something new!
#rbs11 “Unix is somewhat start and imposing but is consistent by its own internal logic.” has a nice way with words.
lmao do i really ?
not surprising.
I would imagine it's difficult to find top shelf conversation...lol
Do not pay a dime for the killing of a human baby!
Thanks for the RT!
RT : Retweet me to win a free prize now;)
Wilbon said " San Antonio is ( pause) god!" bout time!! Turning non believers into believers!!!
the hottest guys come out of the liquer store.
will you stop
Number 60 to get tatted. Haven't seen the list yet but so ready :)
The computer becomes tiresome!
it's a good show!!!
Thanks for the RT's and mentions
Why is it that I have 300 Channels and can't find anything to watch.
And a horse.
My goal is to win so move bitch get out the way
omg I cant talk to you, it means; SHAKE MY HEAD @ YOU!
": Just because a girl's angry doesn't mean she`s on her period. You might just be a complete asshole."
Presenters & chairs: don't forget you can add handouts/materials to your #alamw12 session by posting a comment to it w/an attachment!
I voted for it! RT : thanks, Eric. I'm hoping we can discuss accommodating for LDs
My revver videos are down... Actually revver is down. Is this new? Will l ever get the 75 cents they owe me in revenue?
I will not. Dr. Kezar had and I over last week, so we won't be crashing your party.
Also realized both movies I've watched tonight have the same lead actor but I'm not sure who this is
I couldn't find any answers. Macbook died and I went back to a PC. I have 750GB of home movies in iMovie format I can't access.
Singing instead of doing my project.
I think its nap time for me.
Yay for that! I'll be right over. :-) Enjoy!
ohh ahaha why you change that? :)
#cannonballdookie You crossed the line Tosh man. Can't wait till next week!
"Smash." And, scene.
Finally on my way home. Straight chillin til I get motivated to do my 2nd workout.
Don't forget to throw away expired food!
My head hurt
Given OCLC's presence in the UK (former Fretwell-Downing), I'm sure that will change.
Real Estate. Personal Injury. Corporate Representation/Litigation.... SLG has all the answers... Short Sales, Injuries, Corporations...
We also do Inspections, Roof, Wind discount reports, 4 point, Real Estate www.vcassociates.net 305-232-3344
"God doesn't make mistakes. Trust it, when someone ends up in your past, they're there for a reason."
bahaa not what I was expecting to see..
and unfortunately we need action and cooperation from politicians - often the most selfish, short-term people
Ha! I am watching ur show on Food Network right now ;) RT : On the way to LA... I feel like I live in airports these days!
nah uh my beard is sexy
Just finished 's book 'Tell to Win.' As an anthropolgy & social media connector, I really enjoyed the purposeful storytelling!Thx
Welcome back to College students!
March 23 Shank Hall !! Getting ready !!
6 day til my birthday :D
LMBO you sounds like Tami! Did u watch BBW last night?
Knock it out the box. Test questions, test questions, test questions galore.
First I need a hair cut ... I look rough
I'm dating a woman now who, evidently, is unaware of it. ~ Garry Shandling
Ditto! RT : We need some action in the 3rd Ward.
Hypocritical bitches
By the way, I just took the time to check out your website… awesome stuff. Love the American Psycho reference in your one post!
Playing piano.
Music to my ears! Magazines make GREAT Christmas gifts. Thanks for the biz & Merry Christmas!
Well, I do .Net development, but do much more in IT.
Fabulous footwear is a necessity! Food and shelter are just nice to have. :)
CCM Percussion (and friends) are rocking Louis Andriessen's "Worker's Union" tonight, and other works! 8pm, in Corbett Auditorium!
Can't wait to celebrate with all our friends and supporters tonight at Come Together, our benefit Beatles bash! See you all there!
you see it?
Listening to Mj.... Heaven Can Wait......
yay for turtles! !
Wait, masturbating in public is illegal?!
Holy Grail of intelligence, is to know what's going to happen before it happens.
Perfect day with ! 💚
yo edog dealt to yafew nights ago in the 5kevent. just wanted to say u were realnice guy, classy and it was real kewl to meetya
We don't care what says about you. You're a-ok in our book. Cheers!
You go Sherri!!!! Keep that on rollin!!!
I'm disappointed in UAlbany, thought that program was on the verge of becoming a player in DI. I still think they can be.
RT : Praying BD is ok & nothing real serious!! Doesn't look good!! #heat/knicksgame
thank you :)
Laying down some bkground vocals n the studio
Congrats to the Dodgers for turning around a horrible season and finishing above 500! Keep up the wins thru the entire year next year!
Not even gonna lie. Now that drumline is over, I haven't done shit. I need to run!
Not sure if people are unfollowing me or all the spam accounts are being shut down
Book our Exhale Spa package today - includes Spa Pedicure & Yoga Class!!
Thanks for the RT, MIchael. How goes your day?
Hp gets a fourth 30 seconds into the second half.
no problem :)
Also a little worried at some Operation Chaos tactics from Dems in MI who vote for Santorum just to keep it going
OS X UI on the VMWare VM feels sluggish, even compared to Windows. Guess it's still bleeding edge to do this.
Time to relax and let me sing to you. Ill send you a few of my Mp3s Frank Tony Nat Type music. Message me you email address. Enjoy
Pretty cool, my new One S Android has an FM Radio app. Just checking out a little
Good morning Everyone! Monday always reminds me of my first day in High School. Well, have a productive one at work, School bla bla!
we'll pull through. It's Day Day time!
#milwaukee Wood Fact of the week:One tree can absorb as much carbon in a year as a car produces while driving 26,000 miles.
see you all at #b2bexpo !
Its so hard to get out of my bed.
You want SCOTUS justices that will protect 1st and 2nd Amendment? Who do you think will get you that, Romney or Obama.
thank you Pamafrica
thank you and so nice to meet you!
Shoulder kitten has kitten food breath. I love it.
Where do I start?
The Deputy is just filthy!
the last beautiful thing he said b4 he left 4evr was "shh,listen... listen to the birds" & gave me a friendkiss goodbye.
"Keep it up and you'll eventually score." Gee, Hubie. Thanks for the encouragement? You realize we're leading, right?
now you've got me curious about the ending of NEVER KNOWING - I think the ending of book one threw me off some as well
Started new #FridayListens - AMONG THE MISSING by Morag Joss, off to a very promising start.
I'm no expert, but I use wordpress on all my sites, and occassionally I have to insert snippets of javascript...seems to work.
Just a reminder that you have a little less than an hour to get all your shit done.
I've been gone for a minute...
we would like to thank you for notifying us, and please let us know how we can make it up to you
Nothing says "Good Morning!" "Welcome Home!" and "Heart Attack!" quite like a ham biscuit and a side of buttery grits.
I love Whole Foods! And they're not too expensive, if you buy produce there and shelf-stable staples on sale elsewhere!
Maybe they thought if they stayed quiet, I wouldn't be able to find them.
The BCBG outlet store on Melrose Ave. is totally gone. Empty & for lease sign up.
These hip hop routines >>
Lightweight hungry again. but I reaallyy need to go to sleep... Ain't shxt to eat anyway 😒
most likely that is what they are thinking, yes.
has anyone been able to figure out whos opening for the boys for the beacon shows? im wondering if we're gonna have anyone :/
is it weird that i wanna touch
I want ice cream from Hanks!
I abstain from reading the reports of attacks upon myself, wishing not to be provoked by that to which I cannot properly offer an answer.
Hello what up with sharing??
Why did the elephant bring toilet paper to a party? Becase he was a party pooper.
It's been 17 years. wow RT President Clinton searched for the right words on the day of the #OklahomaCity bombing
you da man boss. stay easy
Thank you for the follow, John! We're always grateful to reconnect with #dbualum. Where you are serving now?
Market share doesn't equal profit. Thanks for the FUD though. It may keep AAPL a bit longer where I can buy a ton more!
Come visit my new office/studio - NW corner of 6th & Kalamath St. 1 block from the 1st Friday Art Walk) good beer & a 17' adult water slide.
Happy St. patty's Day! Be careful out there with the rain and and happy drunk wantabe Irish folk!!
RT : have fun? #10x mentors are awesome and really made for an excellent experience.
Q: if you say you have piercings, do ears still count?
Way to end it right!
Awesome to reach at #SLA. Listening to and others sharing best practices.
i pulled one lol, AND YES
Everyday I'm shuff-a-lin! Who da thunk it? RETRO is back! Where my hammer pants? where's ur neon orange jacket?
Yes, it is clear I was being 1,000 percent serious there.
Rock on ET!
That was such a great book!
love that picture hahah
RT : Insights into Italy. Fabulous! Follow :)
why am i craving gravy right now
I'm always the one who is terrified of losing the people that I hold close, but I doubt anyone would ever fight to keep me in their life.
Another day about done. Tired. Ready for bed. Sucks getting old.
i'm so gullible
no juice on parlays is the standard. 6-5
Hadn't txtd anybody all day
book near after-hours for a short walk! :)
Good thing. So, I should be glad for the time to get stuff done & then I can PLAY all weekend!
Day 2 of awesomeness.
so cute!!!
Break That Single is looking for indie music single to break. on air live & on stage in a studio audience.702-521-9715 Nate
I miss u i miss your smile and i still shed a tear every once in a while and even though its different now youre still here somehow
I'm geussing ur a boy
goin to home room in a littel bit :)
You want to make an exact copy of a DVD? Or do you need to edit the video first, then burn it to a DVD?
He might be kinda cool but hes also kinda a creeper!!!
The Drake concert was definitely an amazing experience, will always remember this
. just said there should be a Surgeon General type warning on football helmets. I agree. Physical sport with high risks.
Hopefully, Volstad doesn't give up 2 or more in this inning.
Got overpaid by accident, but I gave the extra money back. That's right,
Yay! :) I love me BACON!
Hope everyone who went yesterday enjoyed South By So What?! Today is going to be a good day to rest. What were yalls favorite moments?
heather call me. I have to ask u something about the trip
good,thank you
...Although there is undoubtedly much evil about, we humans have a wonderful capacity for good... that is what fills me with hope for...
PRE-SALE is HERE!!! Thank you SO much for your support! It's time to get some CDs! We can reach 15,000 CDs & make a difference TOGETHER!!
Living it up with Jasmine and Desirea tonight.happy birthday Des I love you(:
That 70's show >> Basketball game.
I'm within spitting distance of hitting 300K views on
Not me, I'm able to get to my gmail via browser.
Getting ready for cooking demo by Akiva Goldfarb, "The 6 O'Clock Scramble"
If it's the booze brought to Tek this year watch out!
yeah man, real pumped. saw you had a show with my dudes the love experiment! we gotta build soon, what you been up to?
LOL! I DO remember that! Sorry about the AC, hopefully we'll be able to accommodate you better next time with a working bus=)
With blood.
no, I live in Chicago, they live in Arizona
why r you such a bum
IS HOT
you're laughing bc you know I'm right haha, BTW Good morning
My best friends boyfriend is taking over her life.
Thanks again everyone!!! :)
Anyone else having problems with FaceBook?
Hey guys, go and follow up and coming NYC DJ !!!! Follow backs included!!!
Got us SBux coffee (to go packets) and some peppermint single creamers...also box of variety teas to enjoy too. We'll be awake!
“: I am LION hear me roar! #MacBookPro” SuperPower
my summer might have just gotten a lot more interesting...
Thanks baby :)
what about his merch?(:
Ah, yes. I do enjoy Beckett's Table. Was there again last weekend. There's a lot to eat in #PHX!
No RT : R.I.P. Dick Clark
Hello....Monday
Are yall confirming tomorrow?
Thanks Jessica!! :)
packing for trip to mother ship. Bummed I will miss the Co-op open house at on thursday...
sounds like the 5 is letting Liberal-Bob change the show, only reason 4 ur high ratting is Glenn Beck time spot & You
yes really what you don't believe me fine be that that way jk
thanks much. I appreciate that. I'll be tweeting from New Orleans next week. Have a great Friday
people are still texting me about the poop pic yesterday! I want to scream IT WAS AN ACCIDENT! some people r so touchy!
also, when a pastry chef doesn't make it to dessert round
LOL What if u say you're a kid? Will she give u ice cream XD
You have won the Target Gift card, check your message box for more details. : )
Not what I wanted to hear! Oh, well... The standard burrs aren't horrible, IMO. I was just wanting to try something different.
strange that
OMG! Our deadline is rapidly approaching. Got a dc film? Submit it today, or tomorrow...before November 1st really.
#abq #events - Peking Acrobats - acrobatics, gymnastics, jugglers, cyclists, tumblers &a live orchestra - Jan 29 $25-35
I can't stand when people take their anger out on me.
Got WAY too tuned last night! Think I may till be a tad drunk!
And I love his version of that song.
HA! ❤ THIS! “: Everytime I don't wanna finish my workout I ask myself "what wld do?" then I finish up strong!!!”
I miss last weeks weather..
I think I'm gonna be posted up on the couch this evening 😊
What was your time?
Have a fantastic evening everyone and please swing by for some Italian grub on a sub.
help me dogg im bored tell walter to wake up!! hahahaa
Fabulous Design Tip: Your home can have the essence of your favorite look. Not everything in the room has to be the same style.
Geiger Counter-Wielding Fukushima Hipsters Make Monitoring Nuclear Fallout Cool - Gawker
comparisons to Michael Jordan, Michael Jackson, Tupac, Biggie, etc wont end for a while
save me somee! :)
I love working in a quiet place, I love helping people one on one, I love order, etc. haha. I just decided it one day, idk!
Who said i was subtweetin earlier ?
Weight room!
Ok...I'm getting excited...Shark Tank in an hour! Who else loves this show?
Anyone putting together an NFL Draft Winners and Losers article needs to include Kirk Cousins on any 'Losers' list. No win situation for him
Right now, more than anything, I want to drink at a bar that actually has bottles of beer on the wall
Its after 5pm and its not dark. Uh huh.
Just registered for Marine Corps #Marathon!!! Looking forward to the journey!!
Ugh, feeling under the weather the past few days (also my days off) and haven't really left my couch. Hoping I can get some motivation soon.
Justin Bieber just said pause on rediculousness... What is this?!
he is the new bob wickman , of blown saves . ugh we need to do something about this. well we got the W at-least
It's Official...2Tone 2nd single release "Uh Ohh!" will be released this month. Stay tune everyone...this single is Hot!
Not sure! My only tie is to - my brother. He might know!
Seriously? How is that? RT : Internship at CVS for Pharmacy until 9 then Hangover 2 at midnight!!!! Woo!
Last night niggas was going the fuck in
I still have a long way to go, especially on the cleans (keeping the bar close). Thanks for checking the video out, Coach!
haha I know, I've been working nonstop so I basically have no time to write, but I'm in the hospital today so yeah
I wanted to febreze homless people today but we didn't have any. Was gonna use axe, but "axing homeless people" doesn't sound very good.
Remember God loves you and I love you!
MVBA meeting tonite @ Belvedere 7:30 pm features Jodi Landers and Catherine Pugh, both candidates for Mayor of Baltimore. All are welcome.
It's your unlimited power to care and to love that can make the biggest difference in the quality of your life. ~Anthony Robbins
any time Seamus.
#TheFirstSongIHeardBy was If That's Not Love. =,)
lol, birthdays suck.
I'm up! And I just read the latest NYEW update...
um yeah after school
Hi Miguel! It'll like a little air, abt 30 min in decanter. 1st, inspect neck (or punt if standing) for sediment. If present...
Funny thing about is that she could be a hair model! Always gets rave reviews on her gorgeous hair!!!
According to lottery officials, there is a 90% chance that there will be a winner in tonight's Mega Millions drawing.
Karaoke - right now. Who's up for it?
Such a sick album, you guys! Great work! :)
Awesome. Absoloutely wonderful.
Mark Amtower leading the fabulous conversation on improper payments at todays FedInsider forum!
S/o to my bruh freeway
stop retweetin my shit. It doesn't make u look good.
hahah really cool:)
#agreed RT : You guys tucking your ears into an oversized fitted baseball cap: stop that. You look like tools.
done, really good shit playing right now...
No doctor's note. That was unexpected.
Deammm, the Temperature is crazy down here it's hitting 105 degrees.
Love is in the air!!!;)
They're great watches, but I do suggest a watch winder for the days you don't wear it.
Quick. Want to compile a list of 10 black feminists everyone should know. hooks...Lourde...Guy-Sheftall...Davis...who else?
Just found out that bananas grow on trees and got dirty looks for not knowing that fun fact
yes! Alarm didn't go off. Gimme five min.
im into that.
400 views! Click share and post it on your wall. :) good night!
I don't know, Another personal favorite. SIDE OF DITCH!!!
Bout to go home in a bit and chill till my lunch date.
People who are racists
jimmy said u shuld come hither
cool, ud look cute with a septum though lol and I put my septum bring back in last night nd had a sneeze attack lol
*On Facebook* Hot person: Just ate lunch! *93 likes, 37 comments* - Normal person: It's my birthday! :D *mom likes this*
DVD drive - Club MyCE - dvd drives
have you taken out any drive thru speakers on the west coast yet?
yeah it topped the old man telling me I would look better in a bikini washing the cars
#editing the artist or hugo?
: This Tilted Kilt gig is right in your wheelhouse, Jim. Seriously. But you have to apply in person.
could be hilarious fundraiser
I'd like to think he takes up a plumb job at the Clinton Global Initiative. Or Acumen Fund. Something along those lines.
Book release party tonight for Dr. Jennifer Ashton (CBS News Medical Correspondent) at Bobby Flay's restaurant, Bar Americain.
I did...didn't work. but at least I can go home the 3rd and move a ton of stuff out of my dorm so I dont have to in one day.
I must say I like th5
Tortorella is a dick.
@ the ER with my father
STREET LIGHTS, PEOPLE
My wife wants $350 for some makeup and face creams. Thats like a years worth of art supplies.
It takes me so long to fall asleep anymore that I end up not wanting to get up cause I haven't been sleeping that long...
I don't know if you realize it, but you just called H a woman.
and I never got an email inviting me to the 15K 5 Freerolls at 3K.
I bet, it's hard to feel "finished" and fully prepared.
When your phone decides to meet your face while texting in bed >_< <<
I DID in fact! just had no idea that was Mongolian too ;) RT thx for coming! Did you try the Mongolian Vodka? :)
Ahh well if I don't like it I'm going that colour :L <3 <3
The media whore in me is debating whether to go to Sobo or British Bulldog on Saturday to try and get my third straight world cup news story
Kiddo wants to know if you've met any fairies. (We both love the garden.)
“: My knee felt good during yesterdays half so I'm giving myself the green light to start training (conservatively)." Yay!!
Watching the vow ( :
Lenny Kravitz's daughter Zoe is so pretty & badd ass! Nice!
you deviated from schedule- the beef rib tweets are going to kill you!
can you come steal my coffee so i can kiss you
please make sure your boys cover today
I often wonder why it always seems that assholes make it to the top, hmm glad I am one
we tried that already, if you wanna get better you find a way...and u pressure your boys to get there.
heyo what's up buddy?(:
Stop into 123 W. Madison for a VersaSpa spray tan! Perfect way to prepare for the weekend!
I wish I could chill with someone tonight or something to be honest I'm kinda bored
Ooh, I haven't had Chinese in a long time. That would be good. Thanks!! How have you been?
thanks for the follow. you had me at dry-aged prime steaks.
KARAOKE NIGHT TONIGHT!!
Love that #TopGear is back on TV on the !
O_O is standing right next to mee... :D OMFGGGG
i texted 253 to the number 383838 :)
Free Summer Crossword Puzzle from Desirable Magazine Issue 3
hey can i spend the night with you friday??
we're at
Why is my room so hot😞
you taste like sunlight and strawberry bubblegum. you make my heart beat faster.#mattnathanson & #redbull :)
T-line was sick today. Lots of fresh POW! Hittin it again 2morrow b4 we head to Epic 4 the Jibba jam. Check us out 2morrow handin out shwag!
I can't fuckinnn wait for the NFL season to start, it needs to be September already.
Wait...I just realized that I've came really close to either seeing/meeting all my favorite musicians. WHAT IS THIS FUCKERY?!?!
'Yarn graffiti'- that's it exactly!
right when the song starts, yep.
Tell me, does this smell like chlorophorm?
: Poynter's Iron Pit Gym #Richmond Ky has 1 hour personal training sessions for $20.00. Get in, get shredded.
Automated Essay Scoring...agreed that the current NYTimes and Edweek articles in response to the findings miss the point!!
CYCA has really been thinning out .0019s up....
When I visit the monastery I'll have to ask Mother Hildegard if she's seen Sister Act 2: Back In The Habit
Right now, it is the first time every single one of our sleeping bags are being used by a kid on course out of the Urban Center...
RIP #DustinHengst of #Damone and #Bleu. Will never forget all the fun we had back in the day in Boston. Sad day for friends, family & fans
Charlie Sheen looks ill
We also have; Bacon and Eggs.............6.95 Chicken piccata .........8.95(lunch)...10.95(dinner) Soup of the Day----vegetable barley------
That was in my weezy voice, btw.
That's on June 16th right? We can check into it for you! Just give us a bit.
Helium "Pat's Trick"!
I'm incredibly flattered! Its not that hard or time consuming, promise. Just eat right and exercise regularly.
alas, no encore until next year
Sue her for suing the gilr that slapped her???? Lawd have mercy!
I don't remember Seau having any concussions, but this strikes me as another in a line of recent football suicides who did. Extremely sad.
of course! We are huge fans of yours...
We think a perfect weekend would include a show #Stage773 !
yes I do!
of course this could also be due to drained gadget batteries.
I bet you like Asians. ~ The power of the Asian.
Pinnacle Bank sees 1st quarter earnings improve over weak 2011
Traffic in LA sucks ass today. Apparently if it's windy people can't drive.
Do you know what I hate? Paying bills.
Chi city 
Im so tired
#FF new & old Tweet-forest friends
That was fun!
James Harden is the man.
OMG! Hulk it's morning now; I couldn't sleep so got on Twitter! GOOD MORNING FROM DALLAS and a huge hulkmaniac! ♥
Thanks Dan..
JULIA IT WAS SO BEAUTIFUL AND PERFECT
Hurt myself again today and, the worst part is there's no-one else to blame.
Thanks for the mention! Much appreciated.
You Are My Bestie Right Or Are You A Different Person??
lmfaooooooooooo i love you
haha to me it was kinda hot.. kidding :)
I'm really impressed with you're handling Seriously looking into your services for my domain names. Thank you!
My kitchen sink is clogged like Paula Dean's arteries right now. I really don't want to go to Lowes right now.
I knew there was a reason why I stopped eating there. Now I know what it was.
Great call with Dallas - thanks so much for sharing all the wonderful info!
#wssmiami Less chatter and more conversation, collaboration and action = success!!!
"The mind cannot see things objectively until they're on paper" on journaling
I SHOLL am
“: He like a ray lewis RT : Panthers gotta White London Fletcher in other words a tackle machine”<<<
Mosquitos keep suiciding in my drinks...
Bon Voyage, my friend! Have a great time!
does that help with concentration? ;)
THANKS SO MUCH! I am sitting in a school librarian forum right now at conference in Philly. Messaging you address next. :)
i better be, right? :P
RT : "Pride in Detroit is something you have in your ♥. You can't buy it or sell it, but you can give it away." on FB wall
the centers are not bad. They taste of. But its a hard core so they get cut out... Lol
#Episode93 did drop #wanterful at the last of #talesofwant ?
lol yeah yo! I was heated when I found out it was the last episode -.- they better do a 15 minuet recap cause I forgot
I don't really know anybody on Mill either...felt pointless walking around and listening to dumbass scumbag steves speak
I work 40 hours a week to be this poor.
what you think bout the pacers?
I love how they can buy a 300$ pair of sunglasses & then ignore me when I say I need clothes.
So excited! Going to for dinner tonight! First time! CANNOT WAIT! :)
dats what's up pretty lady :) n I'm doin good just working on sum music stuff
Luntsford 103 is all packed up!
Nerad explains this is a preliminary plan to be fleshed out in community groups. MMSD.inputsession
Just threw Rene's blue corpse on the remaining embers. At least Comcast's got survival game.
You're such an elegant, well MANicured lady.
This is a test post to Facebook
"I'm in the woods so much I can tell you which plants are edible." --Lee Trevino.
Grilling outside with my parents at the Jersey shore. We would grill lobster and corn in the summer,
Drawing is the honesty of the art. There is no possibility of cheating. It is either good or bad. -Salvador Dali
thank for the following.. your music rocks my world!
You can put me in a library all day and I won't mind
im in, just gotta run it by miranda. Im kidding
Saw the trailer not the film, thanks for the reminder!
Oh..how did i get here? What will i do when its done? I am lonely. Not the peaceful kind. The heart hurting kind. :'-(
u better play me back in that damn drawing game
oh I'm trying so hard but its like I'm sitting at home n they're bringing drama to me, I can't take that lightly u know
You know that storage never sleeps :) Looking forward to working with you again/more/often!
:) awesome followed me! Check em out if u don't know who they are! Y'all know I have good music taste! ;) lol
My boss just called me over to his desk to take my order for Chipotle today.
sales mgr needed for Cleveland or Columbus. 10 yrs of overall exp, w/at least 3 yrs of sales mgmt exp. email
Psst! We're doing another FEE FREE Friday tomorrow for Sunday's Wrex the Halls! Buy online! One day only!
your welcome :)
You never lose by loving. You always lose by holding back. -Barbara De Angelis
I swear everyone around here is lookin for a job.
Know of any good Mobile Marketing conferences coming up? Let me know
I just bought $600 shoes. For $60. Fred Segal sale. Go.
Looking forward to more inspiration at #ISASTC. Enjoyed your presentation in Austin & visiting with you and at dinner.
just saw the ima gonna lick you convo, with marv albert and his kinky ways. Think he also wore panties? Thx for including me! Haha
Today is my 15th BIRTHDAY and I love you so so so much! Will you please follow me back???! <3 :) 93
where are you from?
Having a cozy dive-y evening with BBQ at Jamie's then Back Door Lounge
Uh oh...the whooping cough is back!
It's to early to fall asleep 😒
haha I'll be like can I talk to Bethany please! Lol
D&S is covering the InfoShop event with Thomas Sedlacek, author of Economics of Good and Evil, right now bit.ly/oROdKR
Rolling Bob Band rocks Oskar BLues in Lyons tonight for Van Morrison/Band Tribute Night. Starts 7:30; we'll prob play our 3 songs abt 9:30.
I love how when was first drafted they were like he's undersized and wont make it in the league and now he's backing down 6'11 C's
RT : thanks for the heads-up! Conference is NOT today, sorry for any misinformation! #140cuse is April 19th!
Thanks for the RT, ! Welcome to new local followers:
they are trying to "holler" at us
Chicken Fantastic with Waffle Fries here!
Madness is upon us.
Awww!Haha!spell#Confidence RT “: I’m the girl your ex girlfriend will hate, your mom will love, and that you will never forget!”
i followed i followed
we're so excited to have both of you!
i cant hate...just support
Listening to Hammy on from Dallas
Painting murals late each night is making it super hard to wake up for work in the morning.
Rich people seek cheap deals
Week! I love movies & am THRILLED that Billy Crystal will be returning as Host this Sunday!
There's a THICK LINE between me and other girls... Didnt say difference...
It's only a hoarding problem if you never get around to actually getting rid of them & they block your hallway forever.
....... wow. cute grammar britt. meant to say *1D as a*
i love the color of this cake
dang ive been meaning to see that for awhile now.
Hey , let's write a song.
now that you've won a grammy what kind of nail polish line will you release? So happy for guys, way to rep wisco!
College baseball is so fun to watch
RT : "Black Up" By- Shabazz Palaces is everything.
Be Happy, Be Healthy, Be Beautiful
An Idea from Robert Allen: There are 2 kinds of people- blamers & learners. To be in the more joyful group, we can be learners together!
Exhibit Team meeting at my house! So exciting to think about the possibilities in store for 2013!
TERROR OVERRISING IS PRETTY FKIN LEGIT. GOOGLE IT (:
lol naw you know you my nig. You just too trill for some people I guess.
He () makes a mean terrine, but Chef Aldo makes some amazing charcuterie!
tell Brandon I love him.
Yes! Looks amazing Cottrell
I cant go one more day without my car smh....
Amen! Have you seen them in concert? Best of You live is awesome!
: terrible, but spectacular.
LOL, LOVE IT!
Just got the new that my school will be using Discovery Science online program next year. I am SO excited!
Ok the Gruner Veltliner pretty good with no food, ok we forgot to eat, sorry, will try again with food.
If China doesn't play by the rules, why should the US stick to them when dealing with China?
just FEB and MARCH can't leave it there in April no way.
7 hours on the bike yesterday in 40 degree temps with rain and wind wasn't bad with the help of Mellow Heat FTW!
The title of my book is the name of the female lead. The cover art was done by the artist at
Looking forward to learning from for the Data Panel Discussion on May 16 at 2PM
So I want my career to be something where I make people smile because it makes my day when I make someone smile.
vodka $6 oj $3 puking next to at work
hahaha that's messed up
Why can't I sign into TBD?
i don't like you anymore >=(
i had a dream last night that i was in the UK but still in my room...so i guess my house was chillin in the back streets of london
When Mos Wanted danced to give me everything I almost started crying #ItsAnICONiacThing <3
"$1000 level: one pound of my fat, and a square inch of skin."
If we could go back two weeks so this never happened, I would be so* happy<3
Win a spot at our Seminar TONIGHT at 6:30PM with Nicole Wichinsky of DGRW! Just answer our trivia question at 1PM today!!
The conversations me and have. >
#KSsynapse Zoghbi: Knocking MeCP2 out in GABAergic neurons is one model that recapitulates almost all human Rett phenotypes (not anxiety.)
Successful teams leave ego, petty issues etc at the door and focus on a shared mission and come together to execute with excellence
at #ces #kap2012 - "Half the Sky" Facebook game - micro transactions fund real life NGOs. Buy a virtual goat; give a real one.
it was priceless.
almost 70,000 followers bby c: i feel like a proud mother..
#SignsYouLostAFight you say "you good?" when you're down
don't trip, I love your new tat!
You can eat food right? You can wipe your ass right? Then you can play golf
Because junior high and high school are the ONLY two categories I could possibly be placed in
Brooklyn New York City - Video tour of a vacation rental on Sherman StreetProspect Park - end tables living room
:) RT : "I really like his books. He has self-defecating humor."
This reminded me of you lol --------> : ❑ TAKEN ❑ SINGLE ✔Mentally dating my crush who doesnt know i exist.... yet.
Just left prime; now steak and shake with the girls <3
Waddup man.. It's been a minute. You good?
Mom: Y U NO MAKE YO BED Me: Maybe cuz there is no point when im going to mess it up again later???
thank you.(;
coming soon im watching the end of the game then ill switch it when i log onto my comp
Back off to Bradford Beach!
BOOMSHAKALAKA RT : If everyone lived like an American only 1.4 billion could live on the planet.
Think of how much mass is lost when you cut just white flour out of your diet. white flour is metabolized...
The best moment of the oscars happened on the red carpet. You know what I'm talking about. #amIright?
its going to be AMAZING.
You only live once, but if you do it right, once is enough
Do they sound familiar? played the original score for the film 'Requiem for a Dream'
is that Rambo?
It's lunchtime...arroz con pollo today! With a side of black beans. Also, guacamole blt and lentil soup.
I miss you and it kills me.
I hate it already.
Passion is our consolation for mortality. Real success is finding something you love and doing the hell out of it. - Elle Newmark
BWPkwy CLOSED NORTHBOUND after MD-197 due to an accident
Sorry people from Somerville aren't allowed, you have to know the secret Bostonian password..
Why wait for Mothers Day to take mom for a boat ride? Sam Patch sails at noon and 2 today. A pretty day for a pretty ride
how's your head? Becaise you're being a douche bag lately.
Jus like in the movies baby, ima come to the rescue
My baby needs to get better :c
Aww, you should have stopped in for some fries!
FRONT AND CENTER BABY!!!!! :D
That is the last way I'd want to wind up on the cover of Time magazine.
EXACTLY. and a spanish & ss test on the same day :/
hrithik. pick a harder one next time
Goodbye Artpace San Antonio, hello Mexic-Arte Museum Austin!
I'm looking at Arizona skies but Cali is definitely home :)
The truth? I tried as hard as I could. I took as much as I could take. I put up with all I could. And it still wasn't enough.
good morning! Always good to see you here at the station.
julia! julia! julia!
Happy valentines day ladies
Oh look, there's a globe of an unknown white powder on U Street (14th to 11th) sidewalk.
#poem Density of nightmares is measured by teaspoons made of lead molded from the eye sockets of baby skulls.
Seriously you are in your twenties, grow up and stop causing H.S. drama. You have a problem w/me come talk to me directly.
": Keep your head.. heels.. and standards high."
Had an amazing workout today.
2 hours left until we pitch our business! things are looking good, and we have sustainable market verification. HOLLA!
Lubbock bound!! Come hang out at the tonght if you're in the area ;)
dude, the creature is jacked!
We're looking to upgrade into a few decent / fast / wide lenses before the end of the year. Any recommendations for a #Canon #EOS mount?
I already have. Test: would you bitch more about a girl trying to care about a team you love? Or not even bothering?
I will be on Red Rivers Live at Red River Radio today with Host Dellani Oakes and guest Mitch Haynes at 12 noon central time.
jasmine jasmine jasmine lmao
The #momsFF team is using our to stay in touch and navigate this years
Hosting "World Series of Paradizzle" tonight. It's of the leash!
SB 174 moved to the foot of the calendar
Barbara Fiorentino is casting 16 Roles for the film "AWOL." Details for each role and where to submit in the Actsophia app. Try for free!
Damn my pandora is on it tonight
hi :) I just wanted ask if you can give me an advice on how to be a better dancer :) ? Please RT thanks :D
He's Fucked Up! I Want You Grizz!
Great! Glad you're loving it! :)
Right back atcha sugar!
Sony is launching a networked home media storage device called "nasne" featuring a 500G hard drive that allows users to store content throu…
After second-guessing myself a million times, my entry is officially submitted! Any idea when/where the judging will be?
Let's all say something nice to everyone we pass today.
was that at the Met? It looks familiar
Tip: queries are more than visits, you need to factor in emails & any service using DNS on your domain. Let us know if we can help.
Posey, Herron, and Mike Adams for sure and probably a few others..
i agree but the movie will sTill be Good cause it's the HUNGER GAMES
SO shady. Google removed the "Google Wage" email from my Gmail inbox.
DUES are due NOW! Make sure you pay by midnight or you won't be going to formal!
Had a good time at the Aug. 11 meet up in Royal Oak, MI. Got to talk to students & grads from 3 different library schools!
How many toll booths were destroyed in the Earthquake in IL? Did Wrigley crumble & fall apart?
occasionally, shopping is exciting, like when swimsuit season is almost here! come hither, summer
Cinco de mayo with today! Open bar 4-7 down town Philly!
RT - Celebrating my independence by going to Cleveland w Bob Randall and Salasny to watch the #Yankees slaughter the
Obama has already slaughtered three dictators!!! How many did Bush slaughter without a trial?? Zero!!! Hahaha ... you teabaggers can't hang!
Happy Birthday Baby Brother<3
Apologies to all my Aussie tweeps. Promise--no more spoilers. RT No Walking Dead spoilers pls! We're a little behind u in Oz
Good luck tomorrow best they evvaa have love ya babay!!
booth is coming together. We've got a new tent, flags, banners and the barricades featured at the #USPro and #TdF! Oh, and a TV!
no problem. :D haha
thanks for checking us out, tonight! We've got some great chats planned all summer :)
The '96 team is the best, bc of depth. But starting 5 vs st 5 I'd take 2012. '96 was 9-10 deep.
yes! Me too! It's only an inch right now... If that.
Are youu having fun with your Movie ??? I watched one about Hiv last weekk
Next on the big purchase list ... New road bike
3GNY's new webiste is live! Visit www.3gnewyork.org to learn about our group and our upcoming events
Things just got real...
They're here! is about to start.
We agree: true #CRM brings together info from all data resources within an org. to give real-time customer data. cc'
#HR wins one for the day! and What a day it has been!
Hey new friend And all the way from Africa?! Welcome! GOOD LUCK with your new release.
Maybe it was stuck at the post office for years, like the letter Marty gets at the end of Back to the Future II?
Say it ain't so! Maybe I'll unscorn them after work.
Adam Yauch, you will truly be missed. I loved the Beastie Boys from the very beginning.
alright man just hit me up later
It was really good to see her tonight... changed my day around completely
sending this out in my name. if you continue to get messages like this, please report them, so they can be banned from this site. thanks
Jeff, Jillian, lauren makes a great show that should be the new GDLA they should move Dorothy Lucey to 4am
can u get Austin to follow me plz
seen an advert today that said kills bugs dead.. oh..
Please, less about surgery. More about daily lives.
I have had a blast at #PLA12 - it has been great to meet fellow twitter librarians in person
Business Professionals of America National President! Congrats
I wonder if I'll be a bobblehead statue.
Heading to Stonewall with for a daylong of #NatGas discussion. Great things are happening in #WV due to #Marcellus Shale #drilling!
Love it! Have fun!
its okk! But do u like hhim?
I am exhausted. I need a vacation!
good morning everyone!!!!
The man said 'I PERSONALLY don't have a problem with it, but its up to the individual states to decide this issue' . . .
im so swole that the salad bar opened right after I ordered.
“: lmao read my twitter name and that is my response”>>lmao!!!
The day is going by too quickly, trying to get everything finished up before another amazing weekend!
I think vacating wins from past seasons is one of the most meaningless punishments possible. It honestly means nothing.
Crazy.. u makeup an arguement on purpose cuz u KNO wats gonna happen next *ohYea*
The Jingle Bells and Special Program were a big hit with my 3 year old this morning. GREAT IDEA! Thank you so much!
Have a great Halloween weekend! Happy Halloween!!!!!!
I'd say #Giants got it. As hard as it is for me to say it, Patriots got it all locked up.
I try but its so hard
Q: Ever take talents within hospital, ie surgeons, for granted?
obviously your Dominican lol
Cris Carter said "i put a lil change on his head" ... Too trill
my lady tells me all the time she wants to strap up on me.... Idk?
ya cuz since it gets hotter over here earlier like in spring time skewl ends at like the end of may
HaHa! I would have guessed that! Especially since they are teens! They all love Johnny Depp....and Tim Burton, too.
Can't sleep -.-
So, I guess everyone's doing the kettle bell thing, eh? Centuries of advancement in strength training and we're back to lifting stones.
Anne Meara just called me her Scottish friend.
Dear First Day Of Summer, Thank you for behaving appropriately. XO, Bimbos
thanks Ellie! Glad to have played a small role.
Its Wednesday, you know what that means?? 50% off all bottles of wine under $100! Your Welcome. :)
That's not Ben Revere? RT : There's a squirrel on the field at Coors. Anyone know his Twitter?
Surf's Up! Check out the newest warmer and tango tangerine, um!
with the #win!
Could you be any more lovely, darling?
A goal without a plan is just a wish. Antoine de Saint-Exupery
love you blink black + twink
Please everyone we need your help!
A day of extremes, a real tragedy in my work community this morning, some personal good news this afternoon. Trying to find equanimity.
Sick! Duncan texting me right after practice, I think he loves me..
ah! Yayyy! Have so much fun!
YAAAAAAAYYYYYYY !!! Better thank me wouldn't have gotten it if it weren't for me ;) Hahaha jk
I really enjoyed it as picked up the book. Also blogged about it. Look forward to my family's adventures.
Have been up since 330 this morning #miserable #getmebacktobed 💤💤💤
for females, yes.
F**k exam week
B: 50% of current moms don't know how to do what? Call in to win: 313.298.9630
where's that at??? And I'm out may 22th :D I can't wait!!! But still got another year :S
I had a heart then, but the queen has been overthrown...
I read your Mom's blog about Miss Mary Helen. I'm so sorry for your loss. She sounded like a woman everyone needed to know.
i like cramps sometimes
I hope a good weekend was had by all and I hope your day is off to a great start!
beautiful photo, thanks for sharing!
what version of Polaris are you on?
YES WE CAN I LOOK AT MY PIC OF HIM ON MY CIELING EVERYTIME BEFORE I GO TO BED AND EVERYTIME I WAKE UP
Definitely Johnny & Wes. I really hope Entourage takes his name after watching this episode.
how long will you be there?
I'm making a Skype just for you hope you're worth it♥
Tonight! students oratory competition in the Dome Room of the Rotunda. 7 pm!
"Gentleness is strength under control."
rt keep hearing folks talk about it -guess i'm going to have to join the #watchscandal team lol-is it really that good?<It IS LOL
The Lord is my shepard, I shall not want.
a throwdown, a shindig, a hootenanny, you name it!
I am shocked, SHOCKED that Ryan Braun hit a homer off Bronson Arroyo
Violence is a choice a man makes and he alone is responsible for it.” - Patrick Stewart
There is a song, you probably know it, Spring can Really Get You Down The Most
#NewOrleansBowl The Cajun defense needs a goal line stand here
Omg I really want to go to #sunstweetup April 7. But I have to go to my sister wedding that day great ugh.
sweet!!!! I'm gonna stock up for Relay for Life this weekend.
There is only one young and I love everything about it whom Allah gives it to me then I want to marry him and die with him💜
It appears I've been hacked, sorry! My daughter tells me I've been talking about a miraculous weight loss. Too bad it isn't true...
A picture just fell in my living room??
oh no! Hope everything is ok! Get well soon!
At the RNC Small Biz Network ready to get informed!
Followed my followers.KEEP FOLLOWING brb
Arlo Guthrie took the stage - playing Alabama Bound, 1913 Massacre and I Hear You Sing Again. Beautiful!
What happened??
is that what we were talking about ...?
Oh it's that YouTube dad and daughter combo on #AGT. Good deal.
um punch the movie for making you cry ^^;
glad to follow you. Motivation is so important. I am happy to follow you. I will publish a book in January on motivation.
And I love because he is so easygoing and just lets things go :)
Excited for Three Fates release! Keep up the good work.
We think you are one of the most exciting musicians!!
Fascinating interview on #WeightOfTheNation An eye opening documentary on how bad nutrition is in our country. mind boggling
Never underestimate the power of passion. – Eve Sawyer
Great to hear from you as well. I look for to your tweets on my TL :)
I now have type two diabetes
yeah I had that problem too, it was hard to maintain the rich color, I'd turn brassy after like a month but I loved it fresh
It's always entertaining to see how other people's drama unfolds.
Apparently his phone doesn't want you to tell him, hahahah.
Who do you like more? #NYJets or #NYGiants?
LADIES GET FREE CIROC & WE GOT FREE WRAPS #RITZ2 FRIDAY **PLUS ITS FREE ALL NITE** #tonefide 4
Same here! Hope your day gets better. No drama here. *Hugs*
They're only beautiful in comparison to everything else that's up there.
Thank you for the RT to your followers regarding EA and Star Wars being inclusive of LGBT romance. Have a nice weekend!
Some basketball is just unwatchable...45-44 games are not enjoyable.
The answers are all inside of me.
the anticipation of the next season
WAIT! Did you guys get a referral for your China doll?
If someone wants to be a part of your life, they'll be there . Why bother saving a spot for someone who isnt willing to be there now ?
Am I the only one who is wondering why Lil Jon is making a comeback @ the AMAs, or did he never leave to begin with and I just didn't care?
I usually wake up with empty cereal bowls or empty wine bottles in my bed ... Not calculators.
The proof is in the patience
Much thanks to all u guys for following us! We appreciate it!
The answer to injustice is not to silence the critic, but to end the injustice. - Paul Robeson
Ur comments r typical Lib BS. If U can't debate issues U have 2 attack person. U & ur ilk r whats wrong in USA.
That sucks :'/.. That would be awesome tho RT : LOL. no )':
I told my little sister there was a snake in my room so shed stop going through my stuff
RT Real Eyes Realize Real Lies
Scotch and thin mints
Just woke up, turn on the TV- first words I hear "this is all part of a big Sporting day"... Gameday!
John and danny are cool
was so excited that she tweeted :) Our next mission is to get her to update her image!
Happy lazy saturday! Chillin' with the Doo and teen girl, watching spongebob.
first rule of project manatee, dont talk about
get in line.
: new iPad can work as a mobile hotspot
this is a cinco de mayo necessity!
RT : A3 There is so much confusion over what the Big East is, it has evolved into a mess of epic proportion
$.50 chicken wings for the #Superbowl at the Metro Diner. Tomorrow only.
Hooray? RT Former Florida Governor Jeb Bush endorses former Wisconsin Governor Tommy Thompson for the U.S. Senate.
I think I'm going to order me and my mom back glasses.
i should post part 7.....idk if i will tonight, i might do it tomorrow since im not going to church, i'll have time :)
last night smh #CRAZY ! i'm thinking hard about everything because one thing i hate is
Awww ❤ my convo with missed him so much....
G'morning to all of my Tweetsters! Today is a great day to fight for equality!
If you can't clear the Bong, you are doing it wrong. GET OFF MY WEED
Always take things that kids already love when camping...baseballs, dolls, games, etc.
When you cannot rejoice in feelings, circumstances or conditions, rejoice in the Lord. A B Simpsom
Thanks for coming to the show last night everyone!!! You guys are always appreciated!!!! Xoxo, --BA
I like the trade...if Kalish is healthy, reddick is expendable.
am I invited to your big party or
Heres a look at my latest 'Character' reel featuring scenes from the movies Don't Shoot the Pharmacist, The Cure All Blues & A Way Out
That's why I use my iPod instead now
Why'd Sam block ? It's all over my timeline. Lol
fake as hell
Qrazy Panda is a new innovative daily deal site that allows you to party with a purpose with your QR electronic ticket to nightlife.
#Parenting articles on my blog at http:/BCSpeech.ca
Big shipment of designer overstock priced 75% off hits Filene's Basement Sunday March 22. Apparel for men and women, shoes, bags, etc.
same ole same
I just bought H20 balloons the other day! I think it's a sign that a water balloon fight is in order...
#IKnewItWasOverWhen you acted like such a fucktard!!! By the by and not washing your hands
Had a great time at Marquee!
#SHOUTOUT to my friend <3 follow her.
Last day. Junior year, you were awful. I hate you. Upcoming juniors, good luck.
both are good schools :))
no worries
New cd "Our Time" released Friday Night in Dayton, Ohio I will be performing all weekend with
mehh you said you wernt comming back so i stayed off for a bit D:
*is rt": Texas weather be bipolar!"
Encouraging trend: 35 #Kindle Bestsellers above $10 today. Most since late November.
Twitter on the computer is way more confusing than on my phone.
I consider the final piece to the #Brewers puzzle. Ha! Joe's still on a winner!
"Fathers be qood to your dauqhters, Dauqhters will love like you do, So fathers be qood to your dauqhters." -- John Mayer (P.S. I <3 Him!!:)
Thanks to everyone for all of the positive energy and support over the last month. We love designing new products, and you're the reason!
Rehearsal dinner officially booked at Le Colonial!
Just got done with sound check for the senior choice awards. Should be a great time! Hope to see everyone here!!
#thatawkwardmoment when we are all in high school and 90% of us don't still know the difference between "your" and "you're." EMBARRASSING
"this is irritating." SALLY DRAPER MY QUEEN.
Rainy days suck...
thanks for that link! I'll check it out.
Eyes burning is your body's way of saying "Idiot you should go to sleep right now. No not in 5 minutes, now."
I will definitely blog about it... after I finish a contract.
I know
thanks. we're big fans btw.
Touche. Rudy is just really having a rough series, you can tell these are his first playoff games.
Folk Marathon week! It's gonna be a good time. Where's your dial tuned?
you sing! Omg for real?! :D
That was my thought too. Just dumb on his part.
QUE LINDA <3 ohh i love you honey
I am really curious if this new wave of interactive, devised, and non traditional storytelling is the future
I know, GCB, Ringer and Secret Circle. All good shows, all pulled. Ringer was lower ratings but pulled because SMG preggers
happy to contribute and glad to heard that the material is at the right level and not too challenging
Name a pair of more amazingly versatile spices than fresh-cracked salt & black pepper. Go!
good afternoon (:
French fries dipped in the milk shake for sure! YUM
Thanks for adding my site (dailypayne.com) to your list!
Please check your email ;) I just sent you an email regarding your Road Rash games! Thanks!
Game 7 comes down to Pau Gasol and Andrew Bynum. Simple as that
Yay another day lyin in my bed not going to school woopwoop , but still cant walk right :( !!!
Did you know you can shop directly from our Facebook page & from your mobile phone? Spreading the Fancy is so easy, how could you not?
WAY TO GO KNIGHTS! LOVE YALL <3
Can i go home now or??
(500) Days of Summer
my face!!! hahaha
Happy 4th of July everyone!
well, I once stabbed a man for a Color Me Badd cassette tape, so perhaps I'm not the best person to ask.
Everything does is fucking dope.
Smoking while you're pregnant, don't explain it to me, but to the unborn child you're fucking up.
Im still wondering what to get Kike for his bday....
Humanity is surely doomed if someone can get a pimple as bad as the one on my forehead.
Lacking motivation today...
Hey! You there? You hungry? Yea you are....FOODTRUCKS at Morningstar on 124 St. & 72 Ave. It smells reallllllyyy god. Be there!
fuck it!!! its on now!
Happy Birthday to Marty and Ryan. North Park, brace yourselves. 2 bikes pedaling through town. Here we come!!!
Dude at the ballgame has a jersey. I didn't even know those got made.
Ratchet as Hell lmao
The greatest weakness of most humans is their hesitancy to tell others how much they love them while they're still alive. - Orlando Battista
I think Jeffery is destined to be a Bengal. Thugish ruggish baby
I'm gonna report the shit out of this whore
You make me smile. Combine that with the fact that we share a name, and you may be one of my favorite people.
Signing on for a solo show at Findlay Market!
It's odd though, cuz to me when I see the title I see some humor and yes Jesus is part of the title, which is a powerful name.
great song
Lots of places use BMI. Are you OK?
my phone dying so just text me :o
Appointeeship and Deputyship - The most important services you have... With increased focus on the treatment of vulnerable adults The Mon
": God I hope Rickie is back tomorrow. I don't think I can stand watching another Brooks Conrad AB. Weeks not much better.
haha he's talking about how people in one country can't have sex and how his hair make girls wet
You say you'll always be there but why do I keep losing faith?
Hopefully not the calm before the storm! RT : That might have been the calmest Monday in months. Here's hoping things stay...
#CopperMnt is cold under clear skies, a little windy, around 10 degrees I think.
just found a ton of expired ink cartridges from Pike's HP days.. can we recycle??
If I had a magic wand that could eradicate three things that cause human suffering it would be aids, famine, and meathead rock.
You generally feel unqualified delight, ?
Good morning from PA!! Flying by to say hello. Hope you have a great week. Wishing you all the best. Take care.
shoutout to and Monica in the U.K. u guys are reem. lol.
If your thinking is sloppy, your business would be sloppy. If you're disorganised, your business would be disorganised.
Learn Bodybuilding with Elite Personal Trainer Max "The Body" at Hollywood Body Club
After M. Mitchell, stay tuned to #AmericanMasters for the mysterious life of Harper Lee, author of "To Kill A Mockingbird". At 9 on MPTV 10.
RT You smile,I melt.
u guys think some potatoe chips would cancel out my 40 minute run?
twitter is being a bitch -_____________________-
Ya'll sounds like we would be meeting in W Virginia
Today we are playing on Merritt Island to benefit along with 8 other bands! Come support a great local organization!
most definitely.
loved the show tonight. Wish I could have got that pic with you though. Xoxo
I know you can relate. And, luckily, I have friends like you in Houston. (We need a non-work catch up. Like when?)
So excited to join the cast of Saltwater. An awesome new film by Ronnie Kerr!!!
US warns citizens of the risk of traveling to Ak-Ibom, Delta, Bayelsa, Rivers, Imo, Abia, Edo, Plateau, Bauchi, Borno & the Gulf of Guinea"
. took silver in Baltic Porter!
I kid you not - "Nourishment is now being served in the break room."
God say its gone be days like this but DAMN I aint know it was gone be like this....
Doug Collins: "[Kevin[ Garnett, I've never seen him play better."
Downton Abbey always makes me anxious, angry, and (especially tonight) incredibly sad. In other words, it's a really good series.
guess who will be in NYC the first week of February?! Power brunch please!
Jake, its over. And what do you mean tricked? No one tricked you.
Researchers mod computer to copy cat human motions
Can anyone tell me their favorite Ipad twitter ap? Ones I have seen dont have all the full functions.
Summers are hot, and the sun can be blinding on drivers.
dude..this sucks...i dont know what to tweet...blahh
“: All the other trends are irrelevant. #teenwolfseason2 should be trending.” AGREE
LOL!! Yeah that was a pretty big deal up here eh? =)
Not gonna lie , I'm feelin my hair today
dammit i need u
ya ve don charlie no sea tan codo
awww so sweet. I live YOU
And now, Ducks
retweet if u cant wait to see on 106&park today!
hope you got the pic
I can't wait to give my friends and family their gifts so I can show them how rich I am. Presents are the reason for the season.
stay strong throughout this week, its gonna be fucking crazy but it'll be over with in no time
Follow me and ill follow back and give a shout out..
HA! Ya I almost passed out...
I hate to wait..
100 rounds flew by!
Mercury has long been known for creating zombies. Or as Bertrand Russell would say People Who Would Not Challenge Authority. Teeth or Inject
your a noob and your tweets are wrong and against my beliefs.
People are Christmas shopping, no I'm not making this up.
Celebrating my grandma's 90th birthday today!
hahaha , not you !
And it's not hometown bias. I ABSOLUTELY CAPS INTENDED can't stand Favre. A terrible ending to a career.
Rack City Bitch !
hahaha I think they are trying to torture us!!!! 0_0
Thanks for the RT, Jes!! And the sweet compliment. :-)
It's the story of a town and of a marriage. And it's gets that right in a way that no other show ever has.
I might be stuck at school tomorrow.... Great -___-
so sweet
Now that was a hockey game.
what does MT mean?
Haha, yep! Our whole office rocks the Air and we're in LOVE!!!
win. You shall be added momentarily, mine is Koshertest
Friendly advice: When submitting a track to the AAJ dotd, consider adding the musician personnel to the "track description" section.
Then she told me it has Christian Slater in it. OK, I'LL WATCH IT, BUT ONLY CAUSE I'M FREAKING IN LOVE WITH THAT GUY.
#YouKnowWhatsAnnoying is when people think my tweets and/or status updates are about them.smh.That shit didn't have nothing to do with you!!
Just got my hair cut
Any djs out there wanna get my exclusive mashes/remixes sent to your inbox, hit up my email with yours. Thanks.
They are due to the registrar by May 7th but they can be earlier depending on the professor. Good luck!
Nommm...steak plate w/ mashed potatos and mac&cheese :) Now back to work...
slowly coming to terms with the idea that and will soon be at the same meeting but I will be only somewhat nearby. :/
WebKit decides to use Thorn going forward?
swag? Or tchochskies? (not the correct spelling)
Looking for companies needing the Clean Genome E. coli technology. NO IS
#Joplin is asking medical professionals NOT to self-deploy.
Sunny California awaits you!
yeah but they said they would call me down on Monday for a referral and they never did I'm like whatever!!
that's either you or the love child of you and Michael Douglas
The first one looked like a good fumble, second one not so much. Both fumble plays were reviewed.
I Hope my Wishes come True...
Had a table tonight that only spoke Spanish. They were so nice to chat with me all evening. Learned some new vocabulary.
NFC-enabled posters also enable trackable data, analytics, dynamic content, information sharing...
I think 'The Beaver' would have been a far more successful film if it were shot Dogme 95 style.
time is going so slow...
Why was Sammy at the bottom of the list ? I hate how Jessi's mom smirked and Debbie was happy FU ALL Sammy's the best
So excited to go to Lake Powell. In need of a vacation
Not at all surprised that you have k-12 background. My biased sense is that profs from k-12 are stronger, more nuanced educators
upset bc I didn't get to meet you tonight/: but I met your mom and gma (:
I remember catching the bus on Florence & Normandie where the riots started.
yeah , well . Today's THE WORST DAY EVER. and I want her back ..
Building a huge box for a painting
Omg old school rolling stones! :D
Nice seeing folks last night - loved hearing about all the great projects ongoing around Madison!
MY favorite girl-JB :) and your?
thats crazy:) thank goodness for you.guys And other amazing bands <3
Waiting for my friend at the nursing office and of course, I'm sitting right by pizza!
Related: fun bike ride with a new buddy, on a gorgeous day.
Thanks for the RT!
OT in Boston! Pretty exciting matchup at the TD Garden tonight. Plus the Red Sox are pounding the Twins again
lol join da club i still aint off yet.lol bout to clock out doe!!
Shopping al day🌇💙
Someday by Alison McGhee: Someday you will appreciate your mother, but not today.
Based on your avi, I think we should start a band. Just a thought. Let it marinate.
Going to get sam then go to School in 8minutes. :/
just work these 3 jobs
Stoked to see last seasons finalists, especially !
Medicare actuary says, as always, that Medicare projections are based on big cuts that won't actually happen.
RT Success is having others think you are successful.
Thanks for the #FF love, friends! You ROCK!
Yes, I do get to Bellevue often. Loving the Bravern these days!
Careful on I-5 today... Some dude in a Quatroport talking with his parrot in the passenger seat, with me next to him tweeting while driving
Cant to tlk to him again he is so amazin i hope this goes far =] I don't like the cold but dis is winter saying Iam coming soon muhahahaha
Call us now for a blanket throw from Feathers for your pledge of support of $100! We only have one, so get your pledge in fast: 888-621-6900
O ya there was boutz to be a fight at my skool..this girl was runnin her mouth bout me so i was like bitch let's go : p
smile you son of a bitch
#Rising and #Knock are now officially wrapped! -JO
New pop politics observation that Prez. Obama is a dyslexic socialist is too funny. The Prez redistributed the wealth from Main to Wall st.
I'm done following u cause u won't follow back
love you
no!! Your a dummy!! Haha(:
This is what interns are for.
If I see Mac Miller lyrics on my timeline, I will favorite them for sure.
Mom has already marveled 3 times how the food is "good and clean." Jackie is betting 5 times by dessert.
What are you doing on Thursday? Attending #pdd2012 event? We are! We'll be live tweeting all day. Stay tuned...
Have a heart that in no way hardens, a mood that by no means tires, a touch that by no means injures.
Fav MI primary analysis: #Romney barely winning his home state is like barely winning a primary of hookers
it was ok until Wednesday. After that it was great!
I Hate The RAAIN !
Agreed. I also really like Martin Bashir on daytime He's pretty good :)
Well, don't let tech developers know about this, then marketers will really be out of work
RT : Addicted to Porn is trending? Like seriously? -.-
check out rascal flatts new single why wait, new album nov 16
I never realized how hood Ginuwine's music is until i start listening to his pandora station
Eyes shut. Its you I'm thinking of.
Who makes the red lipstick you wear? I wanted to buy some for a Mother's Day Gift.
perhaps next year, I have to be out of town this Saturday...
I miss my homie man :|!
Which way did you get it? Heartbeat from the big wheel or backdoor?
Many thanks for all the suggestions, , , and !
"If I Met One Direction ...." No Its "When I Meet One Direction.." Cus Ever1 Deservs A Chance . Specially You ' <3
we've got to get together to workout sometime before you leave , I've been slacking like the last month
I've seen so many happy people lately. I am so envious.
Kid stuff is ADORABLE! Slim pickins on my size
I'm ready to go!!!
Just when i thought there was nothing to watch on tv... Step brothers is on.
me and my older brother never get along either.. so I know how you feel.
Thanks for the follows!
put that judging finger away missy! I see it
I love our elf! Lily writes letters to Thomas every night....so cute!
Yes, magical realism. Who knows,maybe the next cup I brew will transport me to a neon planet that rains tea & crumpets!
Well played grasshopper. No. RT : So...you're providing for class tonight, then?
Where is this place you speak of?
Check-in Sniping. Real-world Klout. Reverse auctions. say u Wang car; dealers bid 4u
#nf Follow Back
sure it's just your knee? ;)
tough loss for the #Indians today but Angels pitcher Dan Haren pitched one helluva game.
Hey! How are my followers? Tweet me back or txt me 16365849108
Drive slow and leave early today! Roads are icy and bumper to bumper in
toxie...awww thats sweet... Toxie would probably do you straight through the mattress and down a floor! hehe
Thanks for that man!
I know there's a big world out there like the one I saw on the screen.
I've got to unsubscribe to those messages. I was awakened by that one at 7:30 this morning... bleh...
After waiting through a rain delay, and following the game throughout the afternoon's tasks on #700WLW, I am AMAZED at #Votto #REDS!!!
I love listening to music from 2004-2007. It brings back all the good memories.
The truth is us women have no idea what we really want in a man, we jus know that when that one comes along, we'll want to keep him near.
No one gets me like you when you kiss me. Boy, you rock me harder than some downtown band. ;)
"It's what you learn after you know it all that counts."- John Wooden
in the pic ❔
I stayed up until 12 last night without a care in the world
Happy mothers day all moms !!!
Factoring is a great source of short-term capital when you are unable to get a bank loan and you need funds to run your business.
#mybabyis Taking his first AP test tomorrow.
My apologies to anyone who thought they encountered me after 2am. From what I hear, my obnoxiously drunk twin brother was in town.
Adobe's site runs so slowly. Makes me not want to buy their software.
cant wait to live in t.o next year .. its going to be unreal
I have always thought that too!
"Technology and the replenishment or revivication of liberal democracy" - context for #Gov20 efforts, per at
Today's Highlight in History: On May 12, 1937, Britain's King George VI was crowned at Westminster Abbey; his wife, Elizabeth, was crowned
#ImHappy because every day i fall more and more in love with our #Lord and #Savior #Jesus His love is immeasurable!
haha gotta love catherine tate...she's pretty funny! oh and she's donna noble ;).
says that the digital humanities needs to account for itself, explain its own validity
great work!
At the boy's basketball practice on a court IN SOMEONE'S HOME. Feels a little lame to say "nice house."
cuz when u have mentions set up, the person u mentioned will know ur talking to them & it'll show in their mentions
The best thing about today is that the annoying JC Penney ad will stop airing!
I'm just going to procrastinate all this week
I would def be in top 10 :)
Obama: Shale gas and internet developed from #America's investment in research. #POTUS focused on the future.
you are in MN aren't you! Can't wait for u to see MN in the Fall time!
yep they are! Oh I'm just noticing it haha!
Xcellnt! RT : shld do a special..Dine & Cine? i'll take dinner & film 4 thinking of that cool idea.
I'll take pics of mah costume & post them when my bag is here :)
Air conditioning reduces fuel efficiency by up to 10 percent -- roll down the windows at speeds below 40 mph!
If he doesn't that tweet will def be deleted lol
Just wait until seasons 3 and 4
I wanna Rock n' Roll all night, and party every day!!!
Tonite is the second shooting of Rap Central at club rain 9933 Greendield. Live audience, drinks, food. Come supports #EVAPro @ 7
that's the only time I didn't like him. He had them space shoes too.
Happy 99th Birthday Grandma V! That is so awesome. xo
Really? Can't decide between Rivers and Scott?? Wow!
Hey Ian. Thanks for the quick response. Shoot me an email and I'll show you what I'm working on:
Thanks for the opportunity to rave to about NV Humanities today. That room was brimming w/warmth & creativity.
Kandi gave us the last dress honey lol!!
a shutout! (so far!) i can live w that.
I am energy passing through form. My spirit is ageless. Missy McMaster 1964-2012. Your words are my memory cus!
#ireallywant to know what my how my future is.
lol but it's so good! can't. stop.
back from america, had my bulimia creep back up on me while i was there but now anas protecting me again, honestly hate mia with a passion
well, Anthony Hopkins and Benicio del Toro turning into hairy beasts? Could be gross.
hey hey hey. shut up! it's filmed in Indianapolis. how crazy!
“: #Wordoftheday Tabulate Lol!!!!” Lets use that in a song! lol
I'm about to turn 19.. is it that bad that I still look 15??
's budget got 0 votes in the House? Wow....
RT : Artest and Steven Blake won this game, b
hahaha maybe :P lol hm I have to google this now :P
Nice. But um....if it's brunch, where's the food?? Sunday Brunch lockerz.com/s/131760933
His eyes <3
looks like may be the treat of the night, better come to #BASHH at to see tonight!
you're welcome. Go sabres!
When Simba walks on that bridge and transforms >>>>>
| Innovate, never Pirate | We don't follow trends or competitors, we focus all of our attention on the customer proposition
waiting on Neil Peart from Rush on Letterman...
i love you!
Im SO in ~~~~> RT : Haters and Cansecomaniacs. Let's do history. Please write me in MLB all star ballot.
u look like your granddad the check bones
We will be on Fox 8 tomorrow night set ur DVR
See EZ Marketing tool www.Video-TV-Email.com has Mobile Market--A Hott Strategy.RSVP2Come April 18 at 814pm Est Live-Web-Demo
Wow, got my mentions done, you all rock! Hope I didnt miss anyone. Shoot yesterday was AWESOME, will share asap! =)
Two Free Girls will be traveling the world and helping to make it a better place.
*~his specialty :P lmao~*
As dance teachers/studio owners do you encourage your students to explore the dance world? Do you urge them to see other performances?
world building and characters, mostly. And I love/hate Sunshine for all the eating of baked goods it inspires.
ya happy birthday.
very cool...I have a few friends who live there!
“: If there's a power outlet an iphone user will find it. #realtalk” so true!
You know when you be so mad that you wanna cry...... Yea.... Me. Now.
Actually when I was little I would put worms on the swing with me, then I would wonder where they went. True story:-)
it was so spectacular! TRULY! It'll be a hot summer of agony waiting for its return. Ha ha! Excellent work. THANK YOU!
Aj just did a full 12 oz glass gold shlager Malibu beer peach schnopps, get on his level babe
So I've been wanting pizza from for about the past few days. Someone take me there
Mike Seely at Seattle Weekly here. Want to set up a quick phone intvw w/u, Jamal. 206-467-4374 is my #
We have a basic website up at www.baltimorefoodcoop.com -- if you have more ??, email or DM us.
The Soft Shoe Kid
Changing Corenbby. New year. New face. New image.
me ? normal? 0_____o HOW DARE YOU INSULT ME LIKE THAT
It's the beauty of chasing a dream that no one but you sees...
Clubbin' hard, fuckin' women, ain't much to do.
ZIP RT : Hey all you 80's music fans! I hope you just took a lesson in LYRICS by John Lennon's Imagine performed on idol tonight.
5-0 Indians. Marquis was awful.
Ugh he sucks
bad he's Canadian! now we'll never know.
It’s like Thanksgiving for the fish.
back to bed
WWW.STATEAUTHENTICS.COM
Foot in mouth and head up asshole whatcha talking bout
The eagles >>>
1016 followers!!!!!!!!! u know what that means!!!!! CONTEST!!!! announcment coming soon on the details!
I'm getting a lot of praise for my cooking skills!
Loving "Styled by June" it has become my favorite show
I'm excited new look for the summer
Flight attendants were rude and intimidating. Worst flight experience ever. Worst airline ever. All staff rude.
u told me ya big weirdo! But haha okay, its on the dl>.>
#WhiteGirl RT : "I get it, I got it, I know it's good, the rhymes I rhyme, you wish you could!"
The ' PxP Brian Anderson on the call again for the game. C'mon #LOBOS!!!
The "Detroit Sucks" chant has started here park.
I am procrastinating..must finish 2 custom bags before beer-thirty...tick..tock!
thanks :) it was good seeing u the day of Ariana at roseland btw yur default is cute :D lol
Dental x-rays linked to common brain tumor Fox News REUTERS/Lucy Nicholson A new study suggests people who had certain kinds o.
TY 4 the comment I agree. Sometimes we don't sense how we're changing until we look back & see how far we've come.
Retweet this: #5210 from the Healthy Kids talk at #tedxnashville ...check it out!
Thank you! I miss you so much <333
I don't even know where to start with this one.
Started a 'Feedback' discussion here on Facebook. Comment, share, etc...would love to hear from about 1,219 folks or so!
Did you know charity is from the Greek "Charos" meaning grace; philanthropy is from "Philos & Anthropos" meaning love for humanity
love 2012 already!
lets see if there's anything remotely interesting happening on facers.
Don't Forget Finley!! Don't like #Packers WR corps with Jennings, Nelson, 36 y/o Driver and a rookie who couldn't practice.
So we need a logo, badly if you can help us out please leave a comment and we will get back to you with what we are looking for.
I particularly enjoy a good horseradish cheese. This does not diminish the appreciation of more natural flavors. M. :-)
TwSIG Twitter is only one of the social media used in the classroom. Information literacy: identify, engage and utilize information. Teach!
i'm 15 too..:D so how is school going or you r in your vacations?? :)
“: yeah positive,if i was hiring awnd was a boss i would tap that ass .... i mean and hire you ;)” lol imy!(;
oh i gotchu (;
Don't worry too much about your score. Make sure you're learning from feedback when you answer incorrectly. Good luck!
RT think it's time we all start practicing random acts of intelligence & senseless acts of self-control?
everytime he's around me, everyone moves away :c its sad. And no one wants to hang out when he's going
Were absolutely essential in my transition, although they knew me well before that point
glad to still have you aboard , Denise. ;-)
how i no you would b watching lol
Wow. That's impressive. When I left my place, it was just me.
this issue *should* be fixed now :D
We going to party all night , the drinks on me -Wiz Kalifa
Welcome to Twitter !
your pockets stay fat. Y lie bro lol
"LIKE" if you want to try something new on our menu but always end up ordering the same thing
haha!!! Miss you too!
I'm so bored! I hate school...& Mondays
I think Kayla is going there tonight. Maybe she will see you!
Yes we are going to DOMINATE your living room!!
RT : R U embracing what life has to offer or just making it thru each day? Change ur outlook change ur life
all good things. Scratch that, all great things. Nice to meet you!
Officially finished all of my graduate school requirements as of this morning!
Texas Family Law Tip of the Day: Custody orders can be very creative - as long as each provision is in the children's "best interest".
Was that a Columbo mention? Nice...
correction: THE MOST AMAZING day ever! The only thing that could make it better would be you cuddling with me right now :(
I think I am klouting now. I am very confused
A lady just jumped in the pool with her wedding dress on!
Please follow >>
Y'all's Chris? Reminds me of my Texas days.
My friend Emily loves you
Finally slept really good, the first time in like a week.(:
lol.what movie????
you are a jerk for posting that food porn
If I had the chance, I'd be eating Starr every day. Those edamame dumplings were out of this world!
You must manage people through the change. Can't expect everyone to be as comfortable with change as you.
Bout to change my twitter name
i have a great #constanciochange (: wanna hear it?!
I want a gay romance novel :c
you have some fancy cats over there on graves st??
I love laying around all day on sundays.
Yeah, I'm super excited! And they're playing Great White's Once Bitten, Twice Shy on the radio right now!
Grest seeing all those pit bull puppies this week. You should pits on regularly.
Steve Stone is the worst, but he did just accuse Pujols of having taken steroids. So that's cool
High five to
college student quote on evening news...'he did what he can.'
Which are the best US colleges for Astrophysics and Astronomy?
Levon Helm: Drummer/singer for the Band has died at age 71. #RIP - Thank God for his voice and music!
can you please tell me that things will be alright with our team Our anemic bats need to wake up and this Mo thing is crazy
it's a great city, I hope it's treating you well!
hey if your bored here's my number (917-980-6720)
Which btw, is fine. First knew Obama would win '08 by crowd reax to O big screen at Jay-Z show. Can't manufacture that kind of electricity.
I did that on Friday. Early bird gets the worm?
Why Ron Johnson left Apple to head JC Penney - Covestor
New trailer on March 16
If a schizophrenic threatens suicide, is it declared a hostage situation?
In need of a desperate nap! Then heading over to 's house to see her go off to prom!
Had the best sushi today. Because it was made specifically for me by an awesome sushi dude.
I really need to stop sleeping until noon.
Plus lots of paperwork. Doesn't leave enough time for people-work.
Back from the Outer Banks.
thank you <3
Try to make it so that the things that you need and the things that need you, are the same things.
U.S. Sen. candidate Mark Neumann tells WNA/AP meeting he can win GOP primary because he is most conservative candidate
GZ father is most likely Jewish because non-Jewish Zimmermans usually spell their name with two n’s rather than the one n George has.
Probably more comfortable for the warmer temperatures!
Hates being sick! Ugh!
Join us today for annual Doga w/ 11-noon on P street, near Rock Creek entrance. Bring pups, pals + $10 WHS donation.
The energy of a punk rock show is 1 million times more intense than any hip-hop show.
Looking for predictions about mobile marketing in 2009 - please help! (And try to be as specific as possible... thanks tweeps)
You should follow me! :)
yeah....your her best friend, Zaria....beeessstfrienddd...& you getta go to high school together<31
Holding....Holding...RT : Big announcement coming at 3 CST! Hold on to your shorts!
Just call me Nolan Ryan! I'm slinging tea at Ganesha like the Cy Young depends on it!
Which small(er) colleges in California could I consider going to with....?
you are welcome!
Oh shit. RT : co worker is wasted. He just confessed he went running & had accident in his pants. And not # 1. We're talking # 2.
Thinking green this year? Change the products you use at home to a more earth friendly environment. Call 3057427732 and save money.
Hey Dave, when will you be in town again. Rodgers will be her in March - maybe we could all meet up.
Big week! Screenings in Minneapolis and Budapest. We are so lucky!
Happy Birthday to Dude is fucked up beyond all hell tonight.
Yay to the SmallGirls! We will figure this crazy GS timing out soon!
It feels like a maxi dress day to me! RT Should I wear white jeans and a neon shirt or a maxi dress and denim jacket? Hm...
Hey when you get the chance check your
Thanks Leyla, sounds good! Wish it was in person.
wanna say it was Cabin Fever .. my whole timeline was like "did wiz just drop a tape?... oh fuck wiz just dropped a tape" lol
Bored! What's the word in Twitterland???
Are Health Benefits of Coconut Oil Useful for You?
going back under my rock .... have a goodnight
Today is my first promo to a class about summer reading. Don't feel ready to promote and don't feel ready for #dreambigRead lalala
I love how all these colleges mascots are making fun on Big Red in their routine because they know we are the biggest competition!
but ps3 gets it first #fml 
agree. Horrible and weird. And horrible.
Wasted fun
I am going to form a corporation and make profits! I expect that I will have protesters, but they will be my advertising arm. ;-)
What's yalls favorite song from ?
.....so had to google that. not proud of my lack of vaudeville knowledge
A woman must be a genius to create a good husband. Honore de Balzac
Concrete factories on the Duwamish are cranking this AM. Demand is strong. Let's pave EVERYTHING! How about start with potholes?
off to asheville, nc...peace out c'ville, see you on Monday!
Tonight's the night w/ for #ATasteofFashion! Visit beforehand & don't forget to ride in style with !
ENCOURAGE means to "put courage in" someone. DISCOURAGE means to "take courage out of" someone. Are you encouraging the people around you?
Always enjoy playing the "What can I find in my suit coat pocket" game.
Not going to lie, I really hope HGTV is on at HelWell...
I just caught myself singing the Rattlers song
No professor, i do not want to see pictures of dicks and vaginas with herpes and warts. Take me back to the bschool
Great meeting with the new US Ambassador to Cape Verde. Ambassador O'Neal is working to build collaboration between our countries.
Heading out to staff meeting! Can't wait to talk about where God is taking us as a church!
This is dumb
Just won my first paper football game in fifteen years. Good times with
makes u more awesome that ur a stern fan too :)
Haha. Thanks. I hit the unfollow button by mistake. So it will show me recently following you again.
Hey Sheila! Glad you made the connection and thank you for the kind words. :)
Join now! Buybobnow.com
I recommend Healthy Cofee USA, Inc. Much better product and easyer business Opportunity. Let me if you want some sample's?
Stoked for Kendrick and The Dream tonight!!
ok im bored with twitter..im going to do one of my blog shows..peace twitter
A father is always making his baby into a little woman. And when she is a woman he turns her back again.
have some for me!
I spent 1 hour and 30 minutes doing Wii Sports. 338 calories burned.
try to be better~
Congratulations to the Kastles' next-door neighbors, the , for eliminating the defending champion in the Playoffs!
hi Miley I'm a big fan hope can read my tweet and happy Easter :)
Need to try this, thanks for the DIY nail tips (cc: )
What a beautiful day in the garden! We got a lot done. We planted some snap beans and tomatoes.
#TheSkipTebowLebronMovie The Rat Pack Animal House of Over/under achievers while drinkin' Hate Juice in all 'hoods'
Not as long as you don't ask us to apologize for being on emotional rollercoasters half the time. ;)
Just 3 more weeks of school & I'm done with this shit. Well that's till I have to go back 2 moths later 😭💣🔫
let's go with that ;) still waiting in line.
ah, shush. Quit your complaining. You piece of 
Metta World Peace of the LA Lakers is suspended 7 games for elbowing Oklahoma City's James Harden -
I did a story about a Portland couple who wed after meeting on plane
I got sunshine in a bag
#RodeoHouston with my girls and holla!!!!
you're the chance to my shadow
Kirby didn't cry watching this movie. She has no soul
thank you (:
You saw it coming. I didn't.
When I meet you during the tour, I will reach over and touch your butt. Then you will know it's me.
Thanks for the follow Rick! Travel, food, wine, music, laughter...looks like we love all the same things!
Nice thing about ready mixes: the next generation isn't going to have any trouble making pies exactly like mother used to make.
Reminds me of Jean D'Eve Sectora. Are you looking for a distributor in the US?
I want to marry this account: (and thanks to Obama I just might be able to).
Just had my tarot fortune read w/ followed by a stroll & peach daiquiris in the French Quarter. Laissez les bon temps rouler
the "or"was bc at the time the const.was written there were people who were citizens at time of const signing who (2b cont)
RT Who's the genius responsible for allowing Internet comments?
The refereeing in will cost them many fans,
Miami destroyed the Knicks 100-67. I don't think New York will be able to come back from that loss
listening to The Assistant - will star in it in the actual film!
Ew I really don't want to see this scorpion guy again.
Phsycial was supposed to be at 9:30 why am i still sitting in this damn waiting room at 10:07 smh! I cant stand hospitals son
ayy =] not too much, about to go on a little vacation. pumped. whats up with you?
#takeittothehead video so damn Hott can't wait to see it already know its going to be the hottest video DJ Khaled doing this sh*t
NOW im offline
D: I'm sorry!
Trying the time machine we found shoved in the back corner of one of our many storage rooms. Setting it for -5 minutes.
Am I the only one who doesn't care about the Super Bowl. I previewed the commercials already. What's left 2 see? Madonna's vag?
Agreed. My mentors have always been on the impairment, fix the processing end of the spectrum. got lots to learn
. I'd take them against the #Twins any day.
There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book. Books are well written, or badly written. That is all - Oscar Wilde
sounds like you need to go full on paleo aka no beans
great rooms!! So ready to see on #Chief. It will be rockin tonight
To be idle is a short road to death and to be diligent is a way of life; foolish people are idle, wise people are diligent. - Buddha
Mark Cuban. I got nothing
We are looking to fill the position of Personnel Development Manager. This will be a part-time position, approximately 20-25 hours per...
Remember when Lady Gaga was ugly? ... Yeah, me neither.
what exactly is Met trying to hide?
Alone in the movie theater. Little awkward.
I told her she was the CEO of team Jackson and meant it. We on our way.
that's cool
here she come there she go , never chasing after hoes
Okay :) It's going pretty well! Last night was total shit, but today is a lot better. How about you? :)
your garbage even our new cousin gabriel stumph would jam on you
You're so welcome. Glad you enjoyed Highland Bakery. :-)
haha agree with the 'rest day' sentiment. i wish ALL rest days necessitated couch and movie time.
Hammer day lmao
Dont miss mall of america! Best shopping.
I was looking for your information to send to my manager but no longer see that tweet....
City's demolition budget surges to $5.2 million - allowing for an est 225 tear downs of vacant properties in the year ahead
awwee :( You shouldve told her I've been sick :(
DD with BC!
In Music Meeting- Broken Social Scene “Forced to Love” creepy title huh? Cool beats kind of an 80’s sound
One Stop Board Retreat-Sat. 8/27, 8:30am-4 @ the CrownePlazaHotel Orlando. Get your #nonprofit #board together for this 1 day event!
guys skip school friday..i think taylor is and me and sarah dont have school!
I'm not eating black eyed peas for New Year's for luck and money. Instead, I'll listen to the Black Eyed Peas as they actually make money.
We miss coach Cal in Memphis
If a woman ask u to go on a date.. Leave your $$$, Wallet, Debit/Credit cards at home.
RT : 10am Press Conf w/ Sherman Heights community leaders to address work at Farmers Market site.
People worried about census privacy in 100 years time are assuming the future will find them interesting enough to look up.
pretty sure that is everywhere :)
But in the dark, nothing matters. Everything is absolute.
Stop. Seriously?
I now officially work at a recording studio! Feeling so blessed right now. Thanks to those who believed in me =]
Social media intern, eh? What all might that imply?
♀A Man That Treats His Woman Like A Princess, Is Proof That He Was Born & Raised In The Arms Of A Queen♀
i wanna b a teen so bad!!!
RT : yooo Boy when u hear THIS SHIT RIGHT HERE!
11:11 PM Make a Wish ❤
alex has the tee on the way
Are we in for a wet April?
Yeah but the smiley face makes it al better.
My mom is in 1st place in the bracket challenge at her work. hahaha She did better than me!!!
So ready for April 29th!
34 States Allow Opening School Day w/ Prayer. Is yours on list? // Oops! This is a link to American Airlines confirm!
lol yea yea
I want to Skype with everyone now that I have the iPhone. Not kidding tell me if you want to and it'll happen
said that Curtis painter is looking like a girl. Better talk to him about getting his haircut at the next fam reunion
i followed can u plz follow back?
you're welcome and im somewhat new. never really used this before but am using it now
Ifeel like a whole new person:/.
I'm great! How bout you,?
dayum boy. you cute.
Thanks for following us. Looking forward to sharing news and information with you.
Be thankful. Dream big. Never give up.
Oh I know.
« the ROY voting was a joke. Josh Selby 3rd......he played less than vesely this yr» exactly
Dammit! Why is my husband (almost) always right!? There, I said it.
Getting tired
I have learned to Invest in something everyday. If you do that, each day is different then the next.
Follow Me I Promise Ill Follow Back ...
Ok, so the last 2 Mondays' work day have went pretty quickly and I must say -- I'm a fan of this!
OMG Kobe is going crazy
We can't wait to take our team here for some pizza! Thanks for the follow!
Registration for the 2009/2010 Vail Development Team season - deadline coming soon, check out www.vaildevo.com
I'm strong, because I've been weak. I'm fearless, because I've been afraid. I'm wise, because I've been foolish.
All Girls Are Beautiful
Interesting multi-antenna #Aereo solution. Like DAR.fm, it has separate streams for each subscriber. Does it solve the IP/© issue?
follow back!
Today's Sandwich: Mini grilled cheese on jalapeno cheddar bread served with a cup of soup..$6.95
": CHURCH OF SLEEP-IN END EARLY TODAY. HAVE TO GET IN LINE TWICE FOR HOLY SACRAMENT OF COFFEE AND BACON."
is lovin' the free wi-fi at Burbank Airport!
So beautiful it made me cry! so many can relate to a story like that! Love it!
Photos from last night...
": super hungry!! Anyone down to go eat?(:" eat at village inn :))
YOU GO RACHEL OH MY GOSH YES.
The retina resolution makes everything super tiny. It's too many pixels for its own good!
Have you seen that AT&T commercial wearing the Rush t-shirt buying a Rush t-shirt for his baby? Awesome!
I'm not good with expressing myself to other people I like keeping things to myself :)
who's coming to Rock Out with tonight at the Captain Morgan Club? Show starts at 7pm!
Whisper Of The Heart just went from adorable to amazing.
I need the darkness, so please cut the light.
#Vindicated MT : Aaaaaaaaaahhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh!!!! Great News for Brew Crew!!! The Hammer has been #exonerated!
I didn't know that I could get sunburn, I'm not trying to sound funny but I thought that was something white people go through my chest burn
Most people's biggest fear is failure. Mine is vaginal prolapse.
Happy birthday to my beautiful sister Katie, who is turned 25 today! Love ya!!
Omfg i swear i hate it when niggas act like this -_-
Good morning! Just want to make sure you're still avail. for LA public radio interview today? 9:15? Let me know asap, thx!
Dream chasers 2 comes out tomorrow. Legggo
Yes, but "doesn't support" is different from "against"
I go to the bathroom. I miss a goal. goes to the bathroom. He misses a goal. Time for more coffee.
He who hesitates is lost
RT : RT : A4: Yes. Strategy rocks. Research needs & share how you plan to help. A4: depend on just how hun
/le sobs with you /now has to take a le shower
Went and worked out feel good:)
There's a bus! The 23 goes from the CC to there. Or, so my phone says.
You are very welcome and I like that tweet too. Mostly because I want to DM you at 3a w/out you blocking me ;) YOU ROCK GIRL
kick his ass
The truest test of love is if you're willing to keep fighting for it.
If you got some type of twitter message from me don't open it. I didn't send it and i don't know what it is
stop texting in the car!
Hey just so you know.........WERE STILL BUYING BACK BOOKS FOR $$$$$
"I'm about to go Andre the Giant"
You are a young lady, act like one. You can't be loving the city.
Their use is not only good for your cost savings but is a desirable environmentally-friendly exercise
I can't even deal with the parts where JHud is screlting for Jesus in a nun's costume.
Alot of people got prom tomorrow #HAVE FUN
I don't like Mater.
Riot Grrrl Kuching and/or Riot Grrrl Malaysia need a twitter account also.
How are you going to play the game of life?
Giving a presentation to undergraduates about things I wish I learned in college as a designer and the scary job process. Any suggestions?
starting my day with some Freddie Mercury
RT : Next week's chat is about the #nonprofit enewsletter - yes we are talking email marketing so mark your calendars
I agree! It's frightful to know that our Country has problems made by man, but can't get settled by man! Frustration!
Happy Fathers DAy To all The Dads!!
You suck at zombies. That's why I always win. :D
or go get while u can
then again... sleep deprivation will do that to ya. I'm crazy and I know it
You need a back rub or something, sugar? *lights candles and incense*
I started reading the 4-hour body yesterday... excellent thus far.
I'm great how are you?
My new web address is AmplifiedArts.us!!!!
hell no cause croc's suck.
RT Damn! i need to eat for my brain to function well..but i don't want to bec of my diet...haha:)EXAMS is ON!
RT : Love ! Will be staying at the Intercintinental for a romantic getaway...that includes the
Jesus is the greatest love of all
thank you! Miss you lots! Xo
Hey Twitter! Fit City MKE is ONLY days away from going LIVE - www.fitcitymke.com, Forward.Innovative.Thinking/Training/Teamwork.
And if your driving, you shouldn't be looking at twitter
got your text about the adam lambert interview...will you get to interview paula now that she's left the show?
That sure has good taste!
I love me some NY style thin crust! In Seattle, and in San Fran. RT Best pizza ever?
Hey ! We're happy to help you with any removals. If you could send us a note @ w/ info, it would help us. Thx!
I'll be there Wednesday. Thanks, man.
nope. Sad about that, yes but mad at you for comment and disappointed because I remember when you knew better
Thanks everyone for the #FF's!
Holiday sale at Merino (3400 around lenox) until Dec. 3. Hot cocoa and 30 % off some favorite store labels.
Trying to make old powerpoint into non-annoying prezis
i'll follow as soon as i can i reached a following limit im sorry! when its over i got you!
did you say "hit an ear?"
Jake: let's make a movie! Me: ok what's the movie called? Jake: Legend of the Bad Guy! No- Behind the NASCAR Race! (Love that imagination.)
4/20. What a dumb idea. A whole day dedicated to getting wasted? No thanks. My only drugs are coffee and music.
4 reminders / day to take some pics or vid. We'll call this therapy day; shoot something that upsets you then shoot what makes it better.
Is it possible to #winestorm on your own, from your couch? Cause maybe we are doing that now? :)
No it's Manchester United vs Manchester City, Premier League. And a City Derby
at my dads. chasing my dog. hahahaha i love my sister and brother. hahaha aGOT 220$ hahahah
no But I may close it out tomororw and go the other way. Let's see.
'don't throw up on me.'
Dear john: :(
Searching searching searching for an account manager position in Chicago... :)
No more food
Good Morning! Stop by today to pick up any two grams for $30! Strain of the day is Kushwreck! See you soon..
bah, thirties are not far off for me. Besides, you don't look that old. Must be doing something right!!!
Great workout! Puerto Vallarta in 51 days!
"As soon as the fear approaches near, attack and destroy it."
Thanks for the retweet. Glad you liked the comment.
This is painful! 13-12 Holy Family at half.
yeah, I'm staying.
#BAYMAM - Learning the breakout of expenses has helped me with my pricing so much!
I lost my sunglasses, & i barely got then on sunday! :(
yeah, the "good twin" just texted me to ask what your name was. :D
Try going in a room with no distractions & block out all light when you nurse her during the day.
Big day for our boys! Come watch the #Sounders at The Spot Off Main at 5pm.
---- I would love a stomach like that! Useful info!
oh itd be a blast(: haha
At hilton san francisco. Ibm Smartcloud conference. #ibmtechu. The pureflex sessions are on.
Wanted: Meaningful overnight relationship.
A self-conscious and anxiety-producing scientism unites both Marx and Lacan and produces the tensions in their work.
oh thats easy theres apartments right down the road.
Someone plz follow
What's you're kik shit
got a run in today and ate a bomb dinner
Smell a verducci effect RT : Joe girardi said too much is being made of pinedas velocity...says pineda hit 92
Ya. :) The other one was lonely. I'd show it off, but it's all covered up, safe and sound.
Bedazzled speedo? Hm can we expect to see this look on guys this summer?
Supposedly we're going to make it rain for Asik. It's fantastic.
In about 15 min, Matt Need's "The News As I See It" hits you... get all the news you'll never need at 10a, 2p & 4p every day!...
Have that Pet Shop Boys' "Opportunities" stuck in the head.
Your business needs a WHO before you can sell a WHAT.
Everyone pray that Chris () is okay!
I had a good time with the young passionate dancers at Ramona High school. What a awesome workshop is "From Da Ground Up"
Has a white crayon ever been used?
Man I was good until my team lost yesterday! Both Niners and Raiders will be back full throttle next season tho.
"I am the greatest, I said that even before I knew I was." -Muhammad Ali
big up urself...thanks 4 following": Big up and support there artist . Maybe we will work with them."
heath tryna make the all star game hahaha
woo Mr. McMahon yay the best boss of #WWE #RAW :)
So I definitely just ripped my stitches out of my mouth.
I'm a 7 3/4. Finding a helmet is not possible.
Carlos is a very lucky man.
I kinda miss Bartending, I had some interesting customers!!!!
Perfect day, watching some baseball, and making my way through Mockingjay. Could not be more chill.
Thanks sir, likewise to you.
follow me please??
I swear they had to commit me.
In the past hour i cleaned the kitchen, sweept, and mopped the house
Parrots are described as zygodactylous. A zygodactyl bird has the first and fourth toes directed backward the second and third pointing...
This spring you will hear debut singles on the radio from & #WorldDominationBegins.......Now!
DEAR JOHN IS ON. 💜
#420 sesh bouts to happen r u down to
And love, will shine like a burning star, falling from the sky, tonight
More fans leaving now with 7:42 left in the fourth quarter....final home game...but they cant stay and say good bye
Going to continue to workout 4 days a week.
let me see you
it was amazing! :)
This is what will look like in 30yrs
only you would celebrate a Twitter-versary
Guys with a nice smile n tattoos... Laawwddd.
Equal protection & due process are always relevant. They protect the rights of ALL people.
On some real levels doe.
“: Of course my family had Israeli food tonight!!! What better way to celebrate a fun sporting event? #JEWperbowl” love it!!
for me?
Not mentioned but vital: the many bus lines already on 14th St. Would be difficult to absorb so many new residents w/o them.
I guess I get up and get ready -___-
was that Brent Barry?
Just filmed a segment with Mr. Henry Reif for Fox 45. Segment will air tonight on the 10 pm news.
Does anyone tweet? We do. Follow us on Twitter.
He who laughs last didnt get it.
Took some fun risks 2day
SXSW in Austin is something everyone should experience once!
CALL ME FRESH ICEBERG LETTUCE.... CALL ME BAKED BACON... CALL ME 12 ORIGINAL SPICES... CAUSE I AM CRISPY!
Agreed, my Social Media Sith.
Had an ohdee good ass time :')
Wow its early . .
Boutta tweet my ass off
She didn't just "pose naked" She's MISS SEPTEMBER in PLAYBOY. A huge honor in her industry. Thats doing something.
The quicker your here The faster you go
Pondered what ails the world during my lunch hour. Pretty sure we need another social media platform.
definitely thinking about it!! I'd be here for 4 years rather than 3.5, but literally I should be thankful for that hah
See this is why we get along :D
I spent 1 hour Bicycling. 773 calories burned.
I'm all for it but then again it's because I'm biased obv :D
Yes--thank goodness, that could have been BAD.
get her off me get her off me Lucy!!!!!!! Bitch U weak as hell...
From and Brad Segall, relevance is key. You must have a news angle to your story.
content: there is stuff we own (and will digitize), the stuff our users create and contribute, and the stuff we buy and make available
Dude physco Mike was cracking me the fuck up last night. Telling us which atery to cut first to make niggas bleed to death
Lay off me, I'M STARVING
just did!
“ Skip no days off... When you're a mother you get no minutes off lbs If you're a real mother you are on yo shit 24/7”
Got it!
Great talks yesterday: 1) Jagose questioning queer theory's implicit dismissal of (or, w/ref to Grosz, ethical hesitation re) orgasm.
I guess you never know who is judging you. Or who feels they have the right to.
☼ The most powerful factors in the world are clear ideas in the minds of energetic men of good will. J. Arthur Thomson
Day 1 of Phase 2 of the HCG Diet. Loaded 2 days until I thought I would explode! Injections haven't been a problem, nor overly hungry!
Forever reading your letters to help me get through missing you...
THAT was a horrible slice drop shit shot mandy. blergh.
Oh my goodness
Filming for #webseries starts tomorrow! Can't wait to bring our hilarious new show to you!
Bout to eat Breakfast im #Late ;p
who is it?
i have a great year no more drama in yo life since you got me out i hope you are so happy
LAST MINUTE GIG! Spike Hill in wburg this Saturday at 8:00. We're gonna play a new song so make sure you come out!
I normally wouldn't, but he's a devil, so I feel its ok
thanks for your input! I hate for her to not get the sale after all the help she gave me!
Yeah, but I just stay in my corner and laugh.. Lmao! Man:( Keep looking!
Got a ticket today for using my GPS while driving. Can I fight this? Has anyone been in this situation before?
And national polls never mean anything.
About to go get my clothes out the dryer.
"Who's" should be "whose" in your bio. Sorry, compulsive typo finder here!
Nick has 2 get 2 WI & talk everywhere rt now 2 keep corrupt walker government from staying in power. Walker spouts the lies
Going to bed, listening to iheart radio "skrillex" and also thinking about work next week... going back to shingletown.. going to miss Abbey
I wanna trust these females but the shit is scary *four20percenters
put your hand up if u or any1 u know has ever had a problem returning a defective product and just gave up trying. www.legallyspeaking.ca
Happy #FF to
Damn. Well that's some fuxked up ish
Absolutely delighted to spend 2 hours at the park! The more she runs, the longer she naps!
from my experience (more than I'd like), for a significant infection that's a somewhat short run...but azithromycin's a good A.B.
As a fellow member of , thx! RT : Adding the GLBTRT to my ALA membership, which I should have done years ago.
I don't even remeber what I said to you.
GIRL POWER!! :D
Yeah, he jumped the gun on that one. Readin your other tweets I can see y u said that.
Dear San Diegans, putting primer on your car and spray painting it does not make it "flat black." Despite what you think, it looks terrible.
update: getting tire fixed at wal-mart. AJ and Rickle are there. Will, howard and I are at dunkin D's. wanting a free donut.
Who has great plans w kids this weekend?
Need affordable reliable transportation? 1 wk left on the 2012 #Civic LX for only $169/mo with $210 down.
I just saw a clip of Hank Williams comparing President Obama to that of Hitler. Personally I don't think any American president should be.
Let me get tht off my mind
Stand in front of a mirror. Pretend someone asks your age. Answer, out loud, "I'm 82 years old". Will you have good stories when that's true
I want to use a tomahawk to remove Bret michaels' head bandana. Fucktard. Wish he'd never found VH1.
is a Phenomenal women(:
Does anyone need 12 weeks of free digital access to the NY Times? I've got an offer code from my subscription. DM me!
BOOJUM is "Gilbert-and-Sullivan-meet-David-Lynch" says Gapers Block. facebook.com/event.php?eid=161187553917177
When you wake up around 3 for no reason. There an 80% chance someone is staring at you.
Who was the guy she just said was" so cute?"
Getting ready then heading to NKY to watch the derby.. I just want a nap :/
las vegas not too many crazies at 1am, good luck with that!
I just back from your opening at Tilton Gallery. Hats off! I enjoyed it very much.
Texting with good friend Robert. Funny funny.
If you can't get the food out fast don't have a drive through HUNAN MANOR!!!!!!
Oh man, I remember those kinds of meetings. Not fun!
So found out the my dog is mixed with black lab and husky. Which explains that he sheads 24/7 lol, lots of hair to clean.
I wish I'd kept my mouth shut. I gained nothing by fighting Grandma Satan.
I won't stop, I'll keep trying as hard as I can because taught me to #NEVERSAYNEVER ! If he doesn't notice me I WON'T GIVE UP'
Happy birthday to the best boyfriend ever! !! I love you babe!
guess I'm ganna call it a night. Gotta wake up @ 4:30 in the am. #NightyNight:)
you shuld be in a movie
I'm having a great one so far! where are you today?
We are back. And we are keeping all our lollipops.
Did you know, . was created to help all #shopsmall businesses in every community where you #shoplocal?
and #librarian: may I ask why you were wondering?
✰ #OnlineBusiness Tip: Don't go FREE when it comes to getting solid legal advice. If you don't know & need to know - Hire a good attorney.
Our child policy dir, Dante McKay, up first to discuss Medicaid redesign and the impact on GA's kids.
mostly pre but still sometimes post.
I agree!
#WomensBasketball #Golf or #Soccer - Which to put me asleep tonight?
lmao my house in this big ass bucket of old pics.... hahaaa look at the ones of jessica...
Opened up another savings account today to start a travel fund. Proud I've become more responsible with my spending habits this last year.
cried when you left #AmericanIdol and cried/still crying now knowing I'll meet you in #51days :)
Doing my hair before the revival tonight
Happy Monday! Did you do anything special to celebrate #EarthDay yesterday?
I did too! *high five*
Harry Potter at midnight was amazing! I even got a t-shirt that allows me free popcorn for 2011 YES :)
Winter Jam tonight. Excited? Yes.
Been waiting for the 1940 census to come out for a decade. Finally, 26 days to go until I see whether my ancestors made the long cut.
dem #Thunders is dangerous mayne
Loved the last episode of desperate housewives. You are so funny.
are you online??? ;*** please follow me? <3
Good Jam Hunting
hey - please contact me as soon as you can.
Excuse us as we blast some Beastie Boys in memory of the visionary legend that was MCA.
And I think predictability and consistency are more important here than allowing every non-harmful business strategy.
Skj got a super nice scholarship offer from NYU today and she was invited to do her first year in London!!! :0)
Teacher grading my exam in front of my
To have enough to share n to know the joy of giving; to thrill with all the sweets of life is living. Have a great week.
thanks so much!
"Well I know someone who's not getting a Mother's day card!" I shouted....As I walked out of the abortion clinic.
You NEED to get a gameboy emulator and Pokemon Turquoise.
Smokin' on that strong
Finished Stempel's 'Showtime: A #History of the #Broadway Musical #Theater' & highly recommend to academics, students & enthusiasts alike!
everyone can't be Syed :P
Wintry roads are said to be "slicker than otter snot."
These babies at Small Bar are really fucking up my buzz.
Coming by #saveourclinics #logansquare . What do you need? Food? Water? Coffee? Duct tape?
Hey Detroit, I'd like to make it out alive tonight after I eliminate you. Think we can manage that?
you should always be hard on yourself :P
Leaving to film a commercial soon. Strangely enough I never have problems getting up early for filming. :)
Wild weather we're having! In the last hour we've seen rain, sun, more rain, and now snow at our office!
i miss them too!
looking forward to it!
WAIT A MINUTE. Why are you tweeting when you told me an hour and a half ago that you were too tired to watch tv?!
Home alone today so I broke out the v-neck. It's been a sexy, sexy Saturday.
#myweakness Monday mornings
Im so dam stressed with school & all my senior money that I owe & tests & college & work that I cant even lay in bed and relax.
RT Romney: "We lost in Louisiana tonight, but we'll just kind of shake things up and start over again tomorrow."
pls RT -For all the cooks or anyone who likes food, Christmas shop for $1.00 from 11:00-12:00pm tonight. Url posted on Twitter at 10:55 pm.
GONNA WAIT IF HE REPLIES! HA! TREATED HIS ASS!
Anchoring the AM show for all week. Already looking at the clock and wondering what time I should go to bed!
NEED A HIT BEAT? GET AT ME
MT : Health in Mind event: “I believe our childrens’ success depends on their health.”- Secretary Kathleen Sebelius
i am sweating me so real Housewives NJ!!! HOw freakin awesome
and at the ?! Yes! See you guys there.
3rd time's a charm :) LOL sent u msg on Facebook, emailed you + now tracking u on Twitter ... hoping u can find me b4 Friday pls!
This tweet is for #oomf that has been making me smile all day :)
hell yeah my boii
My alarm clock is clearly jealous of my amazing relationship with my bed.
I run 48 miles on Sat/Sun and I feel like $1M, I do 250 burpees Mon/Tues and I feel like a semitruck ran me over
I really want to know how these random people find me when I tweet about something well known.. Like soup and ikea.
oh cool! well good for you then jack! well school is alright at Anaheim, im actually glad (for now) i moved from Katella
you have to enter the pass code in the case to get access to online gameplay fyi.
lmao... band-aids are cool. Get hip
Congrats of , named President of the Year at !
Men fear thought as they fear nothing else on earth -- more than ruin -- more even than death.... Thought is subversive and revo
i gotta go, good night i'm happy because it was a long time to i haven't have a conversation with you <3 tomorow it's austream
we really missed you two.at the game. I actually brought 4ppl to supplement you two. We tailgate next home game?
Ridin round in the SwisherSweets truck.
that's because ypy give me a reason. Through all the disagreements and fights you still stood by me ay my slowest and success
I quickly thought of when I seen #SubwayFan trending:)
Surprising thing about The Avengers, I actually had some problems with the first two-thirds of the movie ...
The #Right2Heal Tour will be at 401 Van Ness ave #SF, inside the Veterans War Memorial Building. Room 207
Mac Miller's high life album is my favorite. #lovelovelove💗💋
what vintage of Thomas hardy are those?
there trying to enjoy your mary jane too! :-)
getting some coffee and snacks and preparing to spend all morning and lunch in a webinar with
Food Fact of the Day: March 13, 1813 Lorenzo Delmonico, was born. He founded one of the most famous restaurants in the country.
Don't lie... you're a closet Twilight fan... I've seen your boyfriend... there is a resemblance...
Honestly, is there anything better than an ice cream sandwich?
My Jouer lipgloss in "Glisten" is MIA yet again. I love it so much yet I can never seem to find it?
Got it, thanks a lot. I'll get after it and make sure all the homies get some APL for summer.
They are both lops. Skiba (black) and Benjamin (brown). Benjamin has a condition called head tilt... permanent gangster lean.
ctfu ikno i did to at first
Yes, I am a fan of ALL facts, not just those that I like. You could learn something from me.
Only 3 #ff today, where's the love? :(
Ok for the last time tonight
Great to see you too! and I had a great meal at
3 seminars! 8 consultations! 4 wig fittings!..I think we'll get through the day just fine LOL. It's not and thing to be busy.
I absolutly hate this walking cast.
Never taking biology 2 now, D:
I think we should to baby(:
Most are during the week. Weekends & Friday nights are the ones that vary the most.
Love this new phone!!!
Ryan Zimmerman puts in a open net goal! Spartans lead 11-8!!! 1:07 left in game
You can't fuck her personality.
Having a info session at SUB II Room 5 at 4:30pm tomorrow! Please come and learn about TFT!
DEFENDERFEST. One Week. "Like" if stoked!
RT : America will only get gayer, blacker, browner, more Asian--and more women will be in positions of power.
Is your face reflecting thankfulness or are you anxious to get back to work? Get over it! SeanLetwat
yeah they'll be there, I can grab you one fo sho
wow I'm shocked
silly nancye. Since when does she go out with friends so often....
#3wordsforyou obama hates Israel
I'm in Keene, NH to give commencement speech at Antioch New England tomorrow.
they made everyone who is not in senior survivor or is not a teacher get out
God doesnt answer prayers right away,jus like Abraham he prayed YEARS 4 nd they got it when he was 100
Holy cow. It's such a nice day that everyone came to Santa Cruz. Escaping the crowds and heading to Trader Vic's in Palo Alto!
Hi. I'm John, Shannon's brother and Ferdy's freind, I've heard alot about you! :)
": Faried has been in on every play on both ends." Glad to see aomeone's tryin to step up. A rookie no less.
The final test of a leader is that he leaves behind him in other men the conviction and the will to carry on
Please tell me no tornados for southern madison county. NOAH weather radio has tech difficulties now
when can you eat pie again? We have a cookie for you
I kinda wna see the fight tonight
if justin was your boyfriend, he would never let you go. i'm his belieber and i will never let him go.
Tuesday, May 3: Evaluation of Systane Balance on Ocular Protection and Tear Film Break Up Time in Dry Eye (D980) from 3:45-5:30PM.
I'll have another!
yeah that's y u have only like 3 followers
now im just waiting for liam and zayn to reply to this.<3
Holy crap... just got caught up on #Parenthood. I'll say it again... one of the best shows on TV right now.
Great game !! God bless you all!! and everyone else!! You played great! *highfive* lol
Dolly parade!
he died a confused man, killed himself with his own mind
felling those Stay With Me acoustic vibes
I'm a thousand miles from nowhere.. Time don't matter to me.. I'm a thousand miles from nowhere.. and there's no place I wanna be...
Super great to hear that downloading books at is a smooth process for you, Hooray!
have fun w the web this week. My friend Bailey is playing
Hey Woman. Great meeting you at #shecon. Sorry didn't get to spend more time with you Saturday night :-( Talk soon promise :-)
Today the azul crew swims then we head to the roller rink for some family fun!
Enjoyed ur EARLY am panel it was good to see Chris R. and Rebecca too. See u
That song derogatory towards women- this from the chick with her boobs out every week.
Nonprofit Law Prof Blog: IRS Rules Foreign Political Activities Do ...
Thank you for all that you do and have done!
I've had it. If your one my "friends" then just remove me from that list I'm done with everyone
My best ideas come to me on my long walks. Still trying to figure out a good way to record them so I don't forget them.
Get to my cousins house to babysit, two boys 7 and 3, and find them both sitting on the couch in their underwear watching cartoons, hahahah
have you checked out Newsie it's been the top RSS / google Reader at the app store for two weeks.
not bad lol
battling the Knicks tonight as a warmup! You're our official correspondent for 4/14 !
A nice Chinese proverb that relates to preventative medicine: "Dig the well before you are thirsty."
So true. Though I didn't want to diminish what you're going through!
i mean thank u lol sowwy
AZ contingent has signs made already!
You say you need me but you really don't need me so , When your bored baby you just call me - ERIIIIKA KAYYNE !!!!
You better feel good about that.
Are you an entrepreneur? What's your biz?
quit putting that face! You have emojis now!
thank you for following us, we love your show!!
Tomorrow is the first day of signature collecting.
How did Pinocchio find out he was made of wood? ~ His hand caught fire.
Hey thanks for the content, Sherry. See you Thursday?
Going out after work for bday!!!!!!!!
good to hear! thank you for choosing Delmonico's and happy belated birthday!
Zealous Wheeler just got DFA'd in favor of Dana Eveland.
thanks for the follow! I love your bio.
and now this gets interesting...
girl ... SAY THAT SHIT
Hey staunch Christians who say Jesus is the reason for the season. Jesus' birthday wasn't actually in December, so remember that.
Pinterest.com looks pretty cool for building and sharing collections.
Sumtimes it is to late to realize what u have lost. And i realize i let johnny go and now i must wait till i bump into
We should whisper, teen hearts, outrageous, go go gizmo and more at the ILounge tonight. Come hang.
#inspiration "Yesterday is ashes; tomorrow wood. Only today does the fire burn brightly.” - Eskimo Proverb
I'm not a big fan of tattoos, but I love Harry's. This kid makes everything great! But I feel like a total hippocrit for saying so >.< O:]
Congratulations to my son Teddy & his girl friend Sara on their graduation from South Dakota St today.Great speakers & party with flaun!!
“ Dont let people get the best of you”
miss you home skillet!!!!!!
i need some tips on how to get more followers on tumblr lolol
We provide counseling for a parent whose emotional problems contribute to their child's emotional problems.
Gay on TV: How television has moved attitudes on same-sex marriage, w/ Sun's David Zurawik at 1 pm
Although Taylor had 14M followers, there isn't that many Swifties :( most of them are eggs, even look for yourself! :(
I may not get my one on one with Madame LaQueer but I get to see her live you
What is the #1 lesson you've learned on what NOT to do at a Local event?
Alot of people are dressed up and have their faces painted.
check out the video on blog.flairify.com
": I would sell my body to someone who fed me raspberry anything. I love raspberry. 💋" good to know ^.^ <333 lolol
I got it.
Yes! Welcome to Tampa Bay guys!
Don't spider mom's warn their offspring about such dangers. Speaking of which, this one looks pregnant. Great.
morning. Bet.
Everybody's saying romance is back. I don't believe it ever left.
Best. Tweet. Ever.
OMG i just saw that was on my account lol
Reason #4 that CIS works: Strong business practices and support across the network, which translate into better student outcomes.
That's not what it will look like. Its a concept, like a future car.
Watts your plan?! Love it. Solar sail boats - nice, I'll take two.
RT : announced that it set the world record in deep well drilling yesterday. Get the details on blog...
& one has to wonder why voter turnout is always a challenge, right? #TooManyElectionDays???
enjoying a fabulous brunch while drinking coffee and reading the first part of one of incredible #screenplays!
Also, Pittsburgh: you have more bridges than Venice. It's awe-inspiring.
Middleburg Comics is out of business, and I'm out of a job.
All adoptees have the right to their original birth certificate. Write your elected officials to get your state to open adoption records.
please follow me cause i will #NSN! and there will only ever be #Onetime when you follow me and today could be it x 50
hm... Well he did say rest in "piece" not peace, so maybe not... I hope it isn't true
Halfway finished with my internship and loving my time in the library. I can't wait to finish and run a library of my own.
The new #klout #firefox add-on is crashing my browser! I take back all the nice things I said about it earlier...
I swea I love my brother Dee nd his kids :) they can get irritating but they can put a smile on yo face.
good day just to stay in bed!
I smell latent tendencies!
is waiting for something exciting to happen to me today...
Woo LMFAO! Love their music.
Nice! This class has been mostly review so far for my e-peer (an MSIM student), so we're working through at our own speeds. :)
You will have the pics! :)
#celtics - the way Bradley and Moore are playing, could they entertain trading Rondo for a young big man?
I'm Finna Go To LA Fitness, I Feel Like Dunkin On Sumbody Lol.
Music time.
wasn't that 's job?
Excited for Balloon Fiesta? Don't forget to stop by the Balloon Museum each day from 9am-3pm for Balloon Explorium: hands-on fun for kids
...what it seems. I just think ppl are all out delusional at this point when it comes to marriage IMO. There r "good" marriages
A blue personality is nurturing, red is the action focused and green is analytical- as a pink, i'm in trouble
LOL! Yep...Hey what's a good rig for on shore night cats?
where am i?
Charlie Sheen (I'm winning)....yii it's ah hit!!!!! #shoutout my nigga
Testing Twitter Schedule with message
Addison Reed is filthy.
CHRISTMASTIME IS HERE! We are working very hard on brand new "FEVERSODES" and some killer new songs!
": just got back from the Kentucky Derby. Good to be home" What a great race this year. I think I'll have another!
Shoot 700 hrs. for 1 hr. of Jersey Shores. Wow. I'd hate to be the editor.
I won't be working here anymore. Unfortunately I am moving before then
My Braves are playing real well right now.
& pole dancing at the park... #priceless hahahahahaha!
Aw girl, I'll protect your crotch anytime. #waitwhat?
: thats good to hear. =) & ive been good just the same. Haha
Enter!!! DON'T be intimidated by high submission numbers. If Nicholl & Sundance get 10,000 entries, only 1000 are actually in the running.
my bad was on the phone last night but wyd
#lakers .... Stop making excuses for Kobe since they lost the lead...
I love you:)
Pizzas, I bake them.
will je pleas follow <-- that is me to !!
Justin Blackmon!!! Woo!
Colleges should offer biz plan competitions (many do). #VirginiaTech #VTKW has Global Stu Challenge each yr
Why am I finding out about the occupy "don't go to work" holiday now? I could have been at home watching Mama's Family all day!
I guess it makes sense for REVENGE to take over the DESPERATE HOUSEWIVES timeslot. I'm sure they have a similar audience.
Lol I love kingsleyy so much
did twitter change its look? or am i seeing things with eyes anew?
suck a toe
Carlos Gomez hit opening day HRs his first 2 years with the #Brewers and ended those seasons with 5 and 8.
follow back ? 😌
saw your plight with comcast; my BF and I are about to hit 250GB on our comcast and I'm not sure what to do. What r ur thoughts?
Thin black phone with blue keyboard buttons lost at ultimate frisbee field. If found, return to Promised Land.
Can anyone refer to me a good Handyman, Rehab crew around Broward county? I need one that can work fast!
Doing my best to avoid checking to see who gets evicted from BB13 tonight before the West Coast broadcast. #BB13 #butIthinkitwillbeShelly…
Planted a lovely rosebush today at lunchtime. Happy that storms are moving in tonight to help settle it into the ground. Thunder in distance
Thanks for following Joseph.
Austin can u tweet a picture of u without ur braces
I thought it was very inspirational. Loved it!
i guess this is why real writers draft things multiple times before submitting them.
People with more than 10000 tweet but have under 100 followers need to stop sucking at life
The teachers must have been offering them a buck a question or something, because they were falling over themselves.
will def take the pressure off of DBs
thank you so much!. Dropoff at site (pratt&light St) is best for now. If you can't make it, we'll try to get smbdy to you soon
um - who does he play for now?
Last night here in #Austin. Had a great time. Ate at The Salt Lick and had the best BBQ I'd ever had. Good music, good food, good memories!
Newt Gingrich has suspended his campaign-aka pulled out of the Presidential Race. Now, there's Ron Paul and Mitt Romney left. Oh, joy!
Or they spend 15 on cancer and 5 on abortion. Money may be fungible, but demand may not.
Was with Jacob <3 now it's time I take a nap! Haha.
Ew, your a fan. Its ok, your a girl :p and its cool, just watch it tomorrow!
Oh how I wish I was more tired... that alarm is gonna make me very mad in the mornin... I already know
trust me.....I defly did ms.miller
GRAWN is a fantastic, insider's resource for all things ArtWalk.
“: #WordsYouWillNeverHearMeSay "OMG. Look at my Persian kittens scrapbook!"” liar lol
If I have to pick one....probably Song of Myself...it's the longest and most epic. A couple other ones probably come close.
Im sayin doe.. Da bro sleep now but he finna wake up ina min
what did he say?
All the honkies went to work lol
Do we know a date and time for the co-presentation I have been asked to help with? Just wanted to make sure I had it on the cal.
in the studio late tonight.if ya got da cell hit meh up
A Minneapolis firefighter is in police custody after he was arrested on drug charges (methamphetamine). More info at 5AM on
stop whining.
Clouds will be on the increase come late this afternoon and into tonight. A 60% chance of rain tonight. Temps in the 70's Thurs and Fri!!
Why am I rooting for the #Celtics?
I'm heading Emory-way on Friday. Coffee if you're around?
follow me! hahahaa
Having Friday off make Saturday feel like Sunday.
Chris Rock at the Oscars... "I'm wearing FUBU"... YES!S
Yes! It's my baby, started in my living room. How are you?
In Fact, if u dont wont to save money or make money on something that you are going to have to pay anyway, lol, why not, still inbox me haha
U gotta send the rain away for the Olympics!! :))
Swerve! Swerve! Swerve!
Q&A: MacFixIt Answers
The movie was partially filmed in Pittsburgh, but the #tumblertour has skipped us over.
Wash has Feldman up in the bullpen? Fuck that. Sit the fuck down or I will come out there and punch you in your stupid fat face.
WMYB at #24 on iTunes. Good Job!
I hear everybody that you know is more relevant than everybody that I know.
I absolutely hate waking up in the middle of the night on the verge of tears from a dream then can't go back to sleep.
Yeah, but we're making great time! -- In reply to Hey Yogi, I think we're lost
I don't know that I can deal with this next week. Graduation? I'm more upset about their graduation than I was for my own.
But using your same rationale, South Panola should still be in the Top 5, right? You guys have them at
Stoked 2 catch up w\ my girl Welcome 2 El Lay homegirl <3
happy birthday brother love you <3!
Need an Old School Breakfast? We serve breakfast all day until 3pm. That's when we shut down, turn up the music, and dance about!
Send us the link once it's up.
Whoa. Pain meds are REALLY working. I should probably sleep...
We are made to persist. That is how we find out who we are. ~ Tobias Wolff
“I want to know what passion is. I want to feel something strongly.” ~ Brave New World
Wilted Greens Salad with Squash, Apples, and Country Ham Recipe from Bon Appétit
Try to see life from all angels !.. Sometimes it's what you don't see, is what you get.
Clearly demonstrating the enormous value of proofreaders. Patti Lanigan saved my butt on many occasions. She's genius.
Hello arnie, what color is yourstate? We need to turn the map blue & REelect #obama Get rid of #TEABAGGERS before they distroy USA
I have no idea why i have such a knack for finding a person whos stealin frm a co.-hey math is math though
Would you get mad if he puts it on youtube because I need it ?
Oh, you couple of curmudgeons!
saw u live in Northern Ca last year found your CD, listening and laughing my ass off!!
": Romney failed as a govenor. He will fail as a president. " to clean-up #GOP mess 2000-08. no more
: I never du im grown nd im goin thru sum right now so I cnt
recovering form AAUP - lots about format, not a lot about how those formats relate. storage and retrieval ignored.
can u fallow me
Did u ever get his
Aegerion Pharmaceuticals Announces FDA Acceptance of New Drug Application for Review
two but in the house and its from my mom's side of the family.
They're fours bees of
having strep throat
Keep away from people who belittle ur ambitions. Small people always do that. The really great make u feel that u, too, can become great.
Here's to a good night ahead with friends.
KU needs to ball-up, now. They're taking shots as if they're asking UK if it's ok to shoot. TAKE THE SHOT.
do you ever work?! ;)
Can't stand publixs when it's full is old people
Vandy's only shot to win... Hit 3's.. Come on defense!
well as long as he is in the midst ....
joint is dope? can we use that for the rhymecal mixtape?
you're the best Vera :)! U always have my support :)! in #Tennis & in life :)! take care:) be safe :)
Spending a few hours in the Center for Discovery today. Enjoyed a snowy storytime with Miss Melissa!
- Not terribly surprising. Dunno why I think that.
too true RT - Real-life moments of visual poetry = magic.
Stay hungry. Stay foolish.
Thanks for the hook up
I hate when you yell at me.. sorry im not fucking perfect.
#TeamFergie #TeamBEP Don't forget to follow our sister twitter!
made up a little Bambaid newsletter thing. its pretty awesome! DM us if you want us to mail you a copy (:
I miss that elf... Thing.
Do you think Ke$ha has $yphilis?
Do guys really like slutty asians?
Pls follow our revamped main Union-Tribune accounts:
I know 2012 was just ridiculous I had no clue what was going on
Ugh who has an extra t mobile phone they dnt use ?
Aww, thank you! :) I've been having fun with it ... I just need to FINISH it!
What's this? 1 year anniversary for 's ? Slainte, friend! Paper gifts for 1 year, no?
come on I'm already hard and waiting
on board. will be heading home to you and the boys soon.
Blue Laws (holdovers?) Throwing snowballs will result in a $50 fine. (awww... that's just takes the fun out of winter : ( )
SURF Report: (PacificBeach) 3-5 ft waist to head high POOR TO FAIR CONDITIONS
Living the New York Life!
Its Hot AF-.-
Thanks! I'll check 'em out-- anyone specific I should try for?
Flop city
Lady Gaga...I bet Blake Shelton is loving sitting next to her.
YES! hahah so good
#FF & for news updates, for great photos, and & for excellent #LA neighborhood news
OK Brent, we get that his nickname is the Honey Badger...
hoodie allen ain't that bad either
Silence is one of the hardest arguments to refute
Leaving a warm bed on a cold morning suckss..
Please bed let me go! Release me now!
I'll drop it in the mail and we'll see.
nope I bought mines when they came out online.
Pau Gasol can only rebound one side of the court per game.
Hand sanitizer is the best way to find invisible cuts on your hands.
What is the definition of a winner speak on it
updated twitter to , some chick from africa had that shit when i signed up but now it's all mine muahahha
Way to a nice morning: stopping at new on my way to work. ¡Orale!
i love u and happy valentine day from me i miss you so much please accept my love i m dying in your love please save me love me plzzzzz
pretty much amazing... glad y'all are getting to enjoy Nashville a little... now get some Pancake Pantry tomorrow morning!
Miss you Cat.
I just had one of those Arbys chicken sandwiches you've been talking about...yum!
good morning
For Blacks History Month. I would like to thank all the Education Leaders,Entertainers,Sports,etc. Thank You.
This game is nerve-wracking! Let's win this one #Nuggets!!
That's how my book club does it. We gather (and eat!), and then the organizer manages a single Skype call with the author.
Can something exciting happen atleast just for once.
Went to a chili festival. They had to chili. No joke. Thought about chili all week. Guess that means it's time to break out the crockpot...
No Girl Wants To Be Called A Bitch , But Once You Put The Word 'Bad' In Front Of It , These Girls Feel Honored. #MAKES NO SINCE
#cil11 hhonors wifi : had to go into safari and input the Hilton conference password. Now it's working fine.
So less WH water-testing than Joe pushing the admin forward, if only out of unstoppable id.
I want a cat bus!!!!
ik, our tour at the white house at 8
oh that's awesome!
awww I just got out the shower so frick you! What's pish! U mean fish oh spelling mistake soony!
This new blackberry has made the most unproductive person ever.
I'm still waiting ? :)
come on Bucky......we can beat Duke!!!
Love school meetings w mom & all teachers & all the teachers attack you ! #yes .
The Wookies are everywhere. RT 18% of werewolves are actually misdiagnosed Chewbaccas.
thank you Scott! We had a great time and can't wait to do it again next year. :) Hope to see you soon
Just bought me some chocolate chip cookies. 's preso has me craving cookies.
I believe the Twitter term is tweet chasers.
can you take a picture Please ?
hmm. Really? How so?
Wednesday, December 14. I am tuned to Political junkie on #NPR Ken Rudin TalkoftheNation
Ha! I heard. Daddy brought those back for them. And didn't put the batteries in... :)
I hate people who blow their nose around me.
go will go!
Posey just came out to cheers. Jogging induces a louder cheer.
im tryna grow up quick lmao
A week of finals next week, then onto the 10 week home stretch. I can not wait to close this out!
RT ": I just want my boys to succeed... Follow their dreams and have them come true.."> I admire u for that statement alone
Cincinn - who's visiting the tent? Take a picture of yourself there and I will post it on our website!
trust me...you can be 1 of those early high levels....but not if you continue to be a non believer...but you'll see
On the phone with zach and
Language pet peeve: ending sentences in "at". Why's that all over daily speech now? "Where you at"? "Where I ended up at." "Going to be at."
I've got five different games of #wordswithfriends going on at once. I love the madness.
here's to a happy holiday season!
Kill them with kindness
If you won a sweepstakes and could tour with any band you want, which one would you choose?
That moment when you finally relax and your mom calls you to do something.
Game went pretty smooth...
"I just sat there for, like, 45 min. reading articles on the internet through band class. Music sucks." -Prep school girl at Starbucks.
thanks im gonna wear those today
thanks u!!
#goodmorning hit u up bout da email...im tryna be down
Rather given great gifts by City of Indianapolis and Butler, including tree planted in his honor at Garfield Park.
HOW COOL! Tonight on PBS (check local listings) check out #nola's Troy "Trombone Shorty" Andrews perform at the White House!
Austin, Tx. U?
Are we that transparent? Oh well. Thanks for the S/O.
unless it's literally baby boot camp. Did you ask the place why all those tires are on the playground?
This article touches on a number of the issues we were discussing the other day.
I think Charles Barkley is right ... only an NBA team can be Kentucky. Davis is a man!
Just finish giving Bebe a bath next Kuikui and that is gonna be some hard work haha
your a plug
Thanks Laura, very kind of you to say. Keep up your great work too!
#Bibliotech12 Can humanities overcome the limitations of
holy crap it's 2 am here on west coast, you are burning that midnight oil!
t(-_____-t)
If I could choose any way to destroy the world, I'd delete Google
thank you thank you! i just got home and heard your vm and tweet
Are you wearing flip flops? LOL
Transition defense anyone? C'mon Suns!
nice. We are about to head out too. No real plans. Let me know where you land and I'll do the same
choices were made last night, serious choices...
call me
I've been very confused by all the #Rangers! tweets, until I realized they are for the NY #Rangers- now I approve!
“: Betting line on Indiana-Kentucky has risen to UK -10 at some Vegas places tonight. Had held steady at -9 this week. #iubb”
Lol I'm in India so it's my morning. 😊 I'm living here for 2 months working on a TV Show “: You have to work tonight?
February break. FINALLY.
Please follow ! She is such a big Enchancer <3 PLEASE! She loves you!  4
Thought of the question in my last tweet on my way home in an area where someone was robbed at 7:30p...where there are plenty of ppl.
When I say Austin, you say Mahone...AUSTIN
some mornings, i wake up and i hate my life - then i drink some coffee and everything is OK again.
Havnt tweeted in awhile can't wait to get my ass back to Vegas oh how I miss you
Courage is not the absence of fear, but rather the judgment that something else is more important than fear.
#happyfathersday,Check out Heart of The King, ATribute to Elvis June 24th heartofthekingontour.com Makes a great fathersday gift
I wonder how much money the right direction action pac spend on anti Barrett ads?... Probably enough to help get Wisconsin out of debt
After my disastrous 17 hr flight from PBI to LAX last week, I'm headed back w/ only 6 days to recover. Lesson learned -- flying
RT : #1 reason that #LastThursday is so amazing: & together. on 1 block.
George hill prolly the best player to come out of broad ripple highshool In Indiana
Ouch! RT : AG Van Hollen peed on self a little, sort of like a new puppy
Maria Elena Durazo: "City on the Edge" video attacked by civ. establishment: it exposed reality of LA laborers. Is it online?
Ortiz hit him with an intentional headbutt. Ref called time in and Mayweather dropped him. He deserved it
boy meets world.
I'll touch base when it gets closer... and any more recommendations, PLEASE send them my way!
pretty good. How was your's sweetie?
TONIGHT CLUB STILETTOS LIVE PERFORMING BY EMPHAMOUS B COME CHECK ME OUT COME PARTY WITH US TONIGHT!!!!!!!
figured it out - Max Patkin he was funny
Want some Mp3s Frank Tony Type music Message me you email address Enjoy!
"I've gotta feel alive... even if it kills me"
HFC is proud to welcome the managers and employees of the Ulaanbaatar Electric Distribution company to their certificate program.
Mothers Day Brunch $29 all you can eat buffet! Please contact us to make reservations for Mother's Day!
At Mobile Future 15 #swswi event to see talk
refuse to have a headache like lastnignt
High five! And chest bump cuz I do that to people I like
Don't miss the tropical conservatory at Garfield Park just south of downtown #Indy if you're here for the
hi! I hope you& the rest of the janoskians have an amazing show tomorrow!Sorry I can't listen I have a huge test! Love you tho x
": The lion sleeps for 20 hours a day." Hahaha this reminds me of
will get there if its the last thing I ever do! #world champions
Admit it. U want Jerry in you (;
Save the date! flying at you on April 20-21, 2012.
Janice always makin promises she know she not gon keep lol foh dawg
Now for the sales!!! Be prepared to shop while you DINE at #ConcertsontheCurve tonight. will have 20% off from 6-9pm only.
The questions/responses will be part of our graphics package in the paper.
scanning (a happy return)
“: A belly button might have more than fifty bacteria species living in it.”
does sex play a big role in your relationship?!
Who should open for War of Ages?
RT : "all you have to think is what is best for the city, and it's easy" - Mary Cheh on endorsing Vince Gray for Mayor
Been looking for a different hashtag, doesn't seem to have one either. Last year it was
you make me feel like shit because i ALWAYS seem to do something wrong or say something bad, and then we get into a big fight.. no big deal
did you make a copy?
ditto. good thoughts.
thank you! :)
Our first meeting after #SWRedmond - excited to meet up with everyone again!
I wish I could meet them!
“What do you get if you divide the circumference of a jack-o'-lantern by its diameter? Pumpkin π.” Comedian John Evans
I attempt to...lol RT : you sing?
All the sexual things on my tl lol
Teal has disappeared...
movie was amazing. Thanks for being so raw & open.
I've only seen it once in theaters & it was an incredible experience. Made me realize how unreal it will look on the big screen
We will be at the Atlanta pet parade...April 21st...will you be there?
you only want what you can't have...
NO. YOU DID NOT?!
what a night capper taking place in Nashville.
^ I regret not having had more time with my kids when they were growing up. Tina Turner
I'm sorry that you had to go so soon.
I would have loved to meet. Too bad I'm in Florida. Why Strong Hoapital?
it hasn't laid or anything though :)
Must go offline for a while to work on some stuff. Later.
Shoe Game of the ass this summer.!Like a Boss!
Intrigued by ILI. Would love to see any evaluations done on cultural heritage social media projects! Anything online?
tweeting about the weather is way more boring. “: Tweeting about drugs continues to blow my mind.”
Absolutely amazing guys! The Today Show. Phenomenal. <3
Now what did I say last week about the Kings? Oh baby! You could see upset written all over the choking faces of Vancouver after gm 1!
This weather is perfect
thank you sir!
yay! treasure! thanks for stopping by and looking. no need to comment, i know commenting is HARD xoxox
Everyone watch #CelebApprentice !!!!! Love this show and u learn so much about marketing!!!!!
Just got told I should be a stripper
thank you :) it's actually my favorite too
Had a really refreshing conversation. Intellectual stimulation can often be truly exciting.
Jeff casteel shows it's more about the Chemistry and Roses and maybe the Sunshine, not just the Benjamins #arizonawildcats :-)
In honor of my jaw being unwired, my coworker saw fit to blare "The Final Countdown" at high volume throughout the newsroom.
#bb13 Daniele needs to go home, she's nothing but trouble and drama, she's a nobody and a devil in disguised, SHE IS A WITCH
vacation time is almost over :(
well they're all assholesssssss.
😂LOL my gma thought FYB stood for frozen yogurt bar!! and
#ff MT Those of you who did the wave in the arena, we have your names and are contacting the proper authorities.
Boo Cowboys. RT : glad for #RGIII but not happy for my #DallasCowboys having to play him
Phone call leads convert more with higher LTV - Brian Lewis
what happened
Sometimes nothing can be the start of a problem now a days. Phones work both ways
I love how everyone but Mexicans celebrate Cinco de Mayo.
#LiesIveToldMyParents im sleeping over my best friends house
Warm thanks for the #mention !
yes! i was sleeping and dreaming and started laughing in my dream and woke up laughing!!!!
Thank you so much! Let me know what you think about the rest.
it was to come up sooner or later. So I chose now
Gotta hit me with that address n inbox G so I can get you looking #FLY down there in TX w/ JenoLo Tees Baby!!
RT Statement from State Supt" despite my leadership in these areas I have not been involved in the drafting of these proposals
“: Blazers should be down 30. (And might be soon.) Comon' guys!!!”sadly true
There is nothing to watch on tv either :'(
Happy Valentine Day!! Come enjoy the evening with Enoteca!
No matter how old I am, still alive, my mom, I - a child.
Tell you'll buy her a cupcake if she buys you a hat and she bolts right out of bed.
thanks for the follow do you do posts from indie artists as well?
It's been a beautiful day at #RISD! If the balmy weather has put you in a good mood, remember the #RISDAnnualFund and give back today!
Howard you doing today? 😉
Husband and daughter are playing Tekken in the other room. Daughter goes to husband "Daddy are you a girl?" husband "Yup" lol
yeah! pub'd! thanks for the shoutout :)
yeah people think were twins sometimes
That guy will probably talk to his friends later about how important he looked in the airport, talking about his big big TV.
This English project... I don't even know where to start. I mean does Gulliver's Travels really need another chapter written for it?
id do anything to have my mom back!
I like the fresh shave, but I think it feels extra cold in this weather...
“: I HAVE to go to the Luke Bryan concert this summer” IS THERE ONE?!?
460 tweets already ? Good job
Hahah that's a lot of balls on fire
I feel 5
Have a great day!
Health plans are like hospital gowns…You only think you’re covered.
Join us today for cream of mushroom soup, and muffaletta moday
Passed out last night doing an extensive image search of Rudy Gay Just wanted 2 see what he looked like in regular clothing
No, not really. He's too smug and not suave! Golden Eye was decent tho :o
me too. one of the scariest things ever.
About to watch my #Saints!
cont. Visit 's table to get a pamphlet on how 2 do biz with them. #sdp2p cont.
- You two ROCK! Thanks for carrying the torch!
I could see that. Let's hope this new place opens soon! P.S. This isn't the Joe Petro that went to STM, is it?
Me and my brother are like best friends.
I love You Sweet Heart:))
Sometimes I wish 1 of close friends were famous but not like Justin bieber famous but like so I would be like
The only person who you should be fully committed to is yourself.
nobody knows wine like Justin know wine
My poop is your house.
Kforce is looking for a Solutions Architect with experience designing solutions that enable people to collaborate & solve problems quickly
McDonalds large coke to start my work day
Not that surprising considering skyrocketing tuition. Greater buy-in for parents.
“: if u ask me how im doing I will say I'm doing jus fine, I will lie n say that ur not on my mind” you chill too!
Welcome out your host, Josh Johnson!
Do they walk berkman, too?? Batting over .400.
Remember everyone you meet has lost something, is afraid of something, and loves something.
“: Tiago Splitter always comes on the court looking sloppy af, but it's cute though. Lol” Thank you gabby for approval!
*deep sigh*
12 hours of sleep is just what I needed after finals week 😊
check out tomorrows sale! 3 ampoules of Vital K. 25% off. your skin will love you for it.
Have a Gnight everybody
What did M Vaughan have to say on matter?
Congratulations to Drew Bledsoe on his nomination to the #Patriots Hall of Fame. Just saw that Drew is new to Twitter - welcome!
Was there ever a doubt? ;) It's on my iphone.
"I need a man who smells like coco butter & ca$h".
Paper wall: legal system creates barrier to keep the poor from accessing resources
That's great. Enjoy this time. Praying a smooth pregnancy and healthy delivery for you!! Night.
Well, has inspired me to NEVER leave her side again for fear of what she might do when her "conscious goes on vacation." 2 DAYS.
Not anymore haha
Eating at an Italian restaurant on Times Square.
People too weak to follow their own dreams, will always find a way to discourage yours.
When I get where I'm going there will be only happy tears.
#2wordsasianpeoplefear "no rice."
So I flip that middle finger and the index finger follow. Chucking deuces tonight.
You can say that again: “: "It's tough to influence an audience you don't know." - Nancy Duarte #in #fb”
Good morning. Do you journal? I never have kept a journal.
When big ass ppl squeeze in small ass seats on the train -___- <<<.
"Major brownie points" Lmao whaat? :D
Whats in monroe county
what the hell i thought loki was played by jared leto and now i find out it's tom hiddleston
Tomorrow night is our Wei of Chocolate and tea tasting! Free to attend, please RSVP!
thank you <3
why the cursing young.
having too much fun with your site while resizing the window. Good user experience with content
I bet that in prison everyone's FB relationship status is set to "it's complicated".
Things that make me roll my eyes: guys who wear their phone on their hip...
Thanks to all who attended the Mail Masters open house yesterday. It was a great event! Discussion of PURL's, VDP & Mktg was eye opening.
agree at least to sub in Bergs for an offensive rebound
Thanks I will. Reading Steve Jobs book right now but always looking for books for reading list
Getting lots of divided opinions.
Crystal Bridges has a number of works by women: Alice Walton far better feminist than Dominique de Menil.
So proud of my Alma Matter!
It's Admin Professionals week! 2012 theme: "The Pulse of the Office" Are you an admin? Contact us for great course options for you!
Fights that last for 2 seconds are #sostupid! People who try to be cool #swag are so not cool! But not
Actors "I want any job", but that's like saying u want to go to the midwest. There's a lot of midwest. U have to be specific - to get there
Just booked a gig 2 play w/Peter Erskine in Mar. After all these years I get 2 hit w/him. Yea!
Agreed, that's got to be the best spot - Purple mountains majesty indeed!
Chillin like a villian. Thats how I roll son.
And even if you have failed at all else in the eyes of the world, if you have a loving family, you are a success. --Og Mandino
Safe (and pleasant!) travel!
Should make papercut shirts with only shirt as siloutte and rest skin.
"Your work is going to fill a large part of your life, and the only way to be truly satisfied is to do what you believe is great work....
Because of their size, parents may be difficult to discipline properly.
Build a quality relationship in social media FIRST before you move to anything transactional. #UWEBC12 via from
Congrats Octavia Spencer!! But award does not = #winning against racial bias. It is another few steps in marathon.
The fact that everyone is either mad or hates me for being belimic.
Washington tomorrow!
You tweeted this -- Fastest and most efficient way to remove toxins & lose weight
On the downhill slide towards hump day.
What to do with my hair today... Idea's???
Yes...was pretty cool!
HELL YEA! BUT IT AH BYTCH JOB 2 BE AH WOMEN AND DO AS HER MAN SAY
#nowplaying Spirit in the Sky, Norman Greenbaun
I've been working since 830 this morning and I've hit my #unpacking wall for the day.
im on follow limit
Good morning hope everyone has a blessed and successful day
not gonna sit in this hotel rm another night and order room service. Boston awaits!
This new facebook timeline is exhausting. :)
more Moore more
probably not
For the record. If you win the mega millions tonight you get 19k a day the rest of your life. Forever.
I Found The Route Of All Evil And Lost A Friend.
Miami wins w/o great game from Wade. Again make more free throws and you will win 70 plus percent of those games.
the lord works in mysterious ways, katherine.
Roses are red. Violets are blue. i suck at poetry. One Direction is sexy.
Woot woot! My favorite sale is back at my store (!) - buy 2 bottles of bubbly or wine over $20 each, get 3rd for 1¢.
stay still!
yes, but I only started watching this season...lotta catching up to do!
get in my bed.
never gonna get too far away..
I'm not about to be working bakery hours and work outside this summer with this afro. I'm getting some braids ASAP.
can i please have a follow???? ive been with you since your first 25000 folowers
House painting is one of the best ways to add value to your home.
That female is fine as hell tho in the video.
T-Money Makes It Rain! :D <3
Major ego problem when suggests I follow
Transition ramp from 215 east to I-15 south shut down due to rollover crash. Live update in minutes on
this is beyond me, i don't know what it wants/is asking! thanks though!!
Totally out the loop. Where you heading?
Recording Screams tomorrow in the Stone Dead Studios Recording Laboratory!! Good times!!
is it ten pm yet?
I am demanding another hang sesh this week before I sell my soul to my new job & because i'm bored out of my tree! :D
Minnesota Vikings Lester Bagley says there was no secret meeting on the stadium. Hear more at 5pm on WCCO Radio.
Someone shit their pants and left it in the bathroom, wtaf
love you too!
I hate terrible babymothers.When the father is awesome he gets no praise!using babies in spite.smh
I don't know about you, but I have had enough of the garage band "Call me rock god" kid who loves his
while we're on the subject should really add a wishlist feature
totally agree
Also thanks to WOSU at COSI who also offered free space. the support here in columbus has been amazing!!
Have fun! If it's Nude Year, though, shouldn't it be a birthday suit affair?
say goodbye to wwwow and drinking on a Tuesday kid. #graduating #careeruniversity welcome to the alumni association.
Light, God's eldest daughter, is a principal beauty in a building.
Hell, why are you tweeting your own tweets, for that matter?! ;o)
One month until Armed Forces Week begins! What were some of your favorite events last year?
Ladies ===> RT nope sure wouldn't
Look at your post !!! ;P
just a couple spots available in the april scene class. who is going to get them?!?!
#FreshmanYearTaughtMe FLAWLESS JAY!
Its hangman. I was never a Brewer fan! If anything, I was a Twins fan. But more of a Mauer fan really :)
After watching Greys I need a cocktail. you are a fantastic actress #jessicacapshawlive Seriously need a vodka tonic!
How cute. We have two Blenheim Cavaliers. They are very sweet.
At the Orthadonist
I would definitely list it.
I need to do your son a favor
It's National Dance Day!
thank you Hun send some more this way
I need some soda crackers or toast and a ginger ale and a big bucket hahahah
Can't wait to help out tomorrow in the LA Sports Arena.
what'll we eat?
My man avoids the camera, but tonight the camera found him! #NASCARRaceDayon SPEED.
Sad way to go : BREAKING NEWS: Penn State trustees oust football coach Joe Paterno, president Graham Spanier (AP)
awe your dog is so cute
fashion policee :P
I'm just like you, only prettier. (; -Miranda Lambert
can i go too?
Congratulations, I didn't get a chance to properly congratulate you and didn't see you after you left the table; you earned it...
Life is so beautiful and horrendous.. its better to have a false peace than an honest war.
Shipping containers = Modular archives for the Someone tell Prof Blanchette! #modularrules #amiaDAS2011 twitpic.com/6pgdu8
tf. BILLY IS MINE. :C
I am sure you are invited... I mean who wouldn't invite you!
Please God let me get to my family To lose them I just couldn’t bare I grabbed on to each one that called me I pulled everyone to the stairs
a lady came through my line and her purse was shaped like a giraffe and I thought of you hahaha
yessir ! I'll be in the house
At UW about to hear talk about failing. I should be the keynote speaker on this topic. I mean, really. C'mon.
Husband: He almost ate that whoe egg himself!
Craving burgers? See you Friday at our pop-up for some of the best belly burgers in the Bay by !
Not a bad first week returning to the fitness game. Lost 3.6lbs. This week I won't skip running on Thursday like I did last week.
#GoTribe Still From Da A Nigga Would Click, Smack A Hoe Tribe, Bitch Go Get Ya Daddy HAHA
Nope. I think that its a question of priorities and some residents have raised this issue several times.
Here's a perfect one for internet poker...56 in BB...no raise...flop 789...3 all ins..6 10 and J 10...all three variations of a straight!
Firefly revival now, Joss! Now!
one side note. It's very quiet there supporter groups walked out at the 16th minute
do you like lady gaga?
a moment of genius between a group of geniuses sealed in the history of movie greatness. :)
Melanie wins SYTYCD... she good but damn Sasha had the soul.
TIFFs were created by Aldus for use in their PageMaker desktop publishing app. Aldus was bought by Adobe, and now holds the TIFF copyright.
#Ecclesia2012 Oklahoma people show up ready to worship tonight. Our preparation begins tonight!
The dart landed on Buttercup's dress. Green hair it is!
harassing guy reading badiou on the bus....i think he thought i was crazy, but how often to you get to talk about badiou on a bus?
sounds good to me.
I think I will -hard to avoid spoilers
Follow our personal twitters, , , , ,
had a couple friends stay over last night; there freaking iPhones went off all night, it was like transformers were in my livng room...
Who else finds that the best time to tweet is when you're walking to your car?
half the times i be wondering "why do they even need me here at work"
one of many reasons
Just finished reading "delivering happiness...." Very inspirational book...a must for anyone who is looking for something more in life
stoked that I have nearly sold off most of my old bass gear. now its time to start buying things off my wish list!
Pink live = studio version #pointblank No autotune needed.
in 2001 I watched/listened to every single M's game live. in 2012 do not feel the need to tweet every game.
Bud, I left Mcfaddens but ask for he will take good care of them! I'm the GM of now.
What up man, remember me from Mississippi.. The studio under Hot 97.7 Blakk brought you to me... Lol How you been Fam..
Giving turns your customers into your best marketers.
Totally fantastic to catch up with & at Warszawa in Santa Monica. High fives & polish beers were had by all.
Oh snap you should cover Chris Brown's Forever' ;)
just make sure u bring milk!!! Lol ~ahah
I have girl scout cookies, you can put them on his desk too.
Have to say-i got one of the coolest sisters a brother could ever have.
Message from the Manager Man himself: "Another Joe/Erick collaboration turns into yet another crazy awesome debut special."
LOL they will laugh at me if I claim to be a celebrity!
yeah; I love him too♥
tehehehe yeah buddy
: Thx for your VT comments-- The intro slide is PowerPoint :)
Make a stop in Palestine/Israel!
haha see u then! ;)
"Lord Jesus, we ask you now to help us remain with you always, to be close to you with the ardor of our hearts,"
So many people on the 0L bus this am, they were almost on the drivers lap. Did that many people get a job or does need another bus?
you are welcome. Thanks for creating great content.
Via // But You, Lord, are a shield around me, my glory, and the One who lifts up my head. (Psalm 3:3 HCSB)
definitely! Sorry I had to run out so soon, I'm sure we will meet again!
The future freaks me out
Who needs a TV when you have twitter?
I wish i was somebody special in your eyes.
Wisdon is not a product of schooling but of the lifelong attempt to acquire it..
Burr! It's cold out side.
1 in every 13 people on the planet are on Facebook. We will prob be asked to give our FB status at Border Control soon!
I haven't cried for two days. I thought I was doing so well. But all those old voicemails killed me
#hastac2011: theme for this set of lightening talks is definitely "boot strapping!"
Slept in
Panelists: Theresa Collington, Mike Wilson, Don North
UNLEASHING jOY IS LOOKING FORWARD TO CONNECTING WITH THE COMMUNTIY The Art of Schmoozing and listen to Bouncing Back ---Dr. C
Thomas Edison was grounded for 2 months when he asked a loyal friend to eat crushed worms.
Yeah but you just used irascible in a sentence. Hawt
Since "the world" is soo worried... nothing I wouldn't do for em...
you get more for ur money wen u fuk wit SHOUT OUT
“: SIUC domecoming. Two thousand and gay.”. That's kinky Brigit. Hot.
New: Green coffee bean extract is the newest pill deemed safe for fat burning.
When #ChuckNorris wants popcorn, he breathes on Nebraska.
I hope "GOT" means he was only tranquilized and taken back to his home. Right? :)
#10confessions I miss 's small venue shows more than you will ever know. :'(
Injustice could be eradicated, but human disputes and natural limits cannot be removed.
Guys, "Dirty Dancing" is the best movie ever.
Sorry I get so many msgs plus I work a lot too, so its hard to keep up with them all!!
Stand up for what you believe in, even if it means standing alone.
Great! Week of May 7th is awesome. Anytime works for me as that's finals week and no finals! I will DM my sell later.
omfg the tears stream... watching the part where cher gets voted off
Just saw a girl sobbing because she heard Nate Dogg died. Really?
yes I knew all that haha. He friends with my cousin, but i don't understand that whole last name thing
Just booked the film called Peephole. It's nice to hear the executive producer say "You were our fav of the day :)"
Gonna catch a freight train.........
Pretty sure the fat old guy in the BMW behind me was getting road head. Thanks, Parma.
Let me tell ya somethin babe!
Baby Cakes, im pretty sure I'll be in LB with partying on Saturday night if you wanna join
I have a shovel you can borrow
yes": Anyone else in favor of not having Darnell Gant shoot 3-pointers in critical situations? Second time this season. #Huskies"
RT Ron Paul running a cash bar at his party?? Better only be taking real gold money. None of this fiat currency nonsense.
Hey! Ladyfriend is playing a great show tonight! Also playing: Whisperlights and !
RT #Louisville coach Rick Pitino is a perfect 10-0 in Sweet 16 games. That's simply incredible.
I've been feeling the same the past few days.... not suuupppppeeeerrr sick but still sick
lol yup! RT : now Follows on Twitter :)
And Serena...
Andre's experience matters.
I know right! #crazy 😲
at least its a good place to make a regular hang out ;)
becus it's Windows :]
Happy New Year Vikas, see you at CES!
I'm not home . And I no longer have wifi at home.
please pick me and give me the chance to make my 2 lovely daughters life :-)
for the follow
Also Thanks for doing this contest and all of the others you have held.
what's that say? No iphone. Lol
IF YOU GO TO LONDON LOOK FOR 1D HEHE IM STALKING THEM WHEN THEY TO VEGAS WITH STEPHANIE KELSEY AND KYLIE
goin out for the day!(:
Happy Mothers Day to all moms today! You birthed a child(ren)... Enough said. 💝💝💜💛
Ride your bike, take the bus or walk to VIA and get 20% off your bill today! It's Walker Rebate Wednesday - time for your reward!
RT : I had your blackened chicken po boy and vegetarian jambalaya with for the #YPweek today. DELICIOUS!
whats your addiction?
Thank you for the 75th Anniversary wishes. Looking forward to the next 75!
The rest of that panda is probably less beautiful.
i just heard a girl talking about an enema on the bus
if you're gonna report it then go all the way. WHAT they are eating may be a crucial indicator. Come on Breer.
keep at it and stay up
Sorry to hear that! Please DM me so I can get more info on your order and address the issue for you
The RIG Region 7 AOS Panel is now reviewing app #130019 Festival Music Society.
2k12 WHO FEELS DIFFERENT WHAT REMAINS THE SAME WHATS NEXT ? FROM SQUALA''IF EYE COULD LIVE AGAIN'' TELL U
dont be depressed honey!!
screen test
you know I love you, but this last batch of shirts I just got are so thin I can see through them. Whats up?
Had a dream about #vegas can't wait!!
sleep.. it would be a great thing right about now
I hate you, but think I love you at the same time.
already on it ;)
For a second there, you thought I was really cool! haha
Well thank you!
Okay maybe not. The waffle is quite sweet on its own
Should I buy it on vinyl? I should buy it on vinyl.
it would be a pleasure to have you!
MT from #EstherMcCoy short story "The Important House" in , 4-17-8 "You've made it look as if no one lived here."
Wish I didn't have so much studying today! Looks Like a good dog walking day at
the graphs of your spending usually are like punches to the stomach... i used to eat out so much and didn't even realize it.
hope your day speeds up! love ya! take a break would ya? lol
#crowdsourcing - what do you want to do with the laptop? speed, multimedia, office functions?
Hopefully charged his eyepad last night.
"You remind me of Peppy Miller. You would have been so classy in the 20s." #BestComplimentEver you made my weekend!
View our new Facebook site: www.facebook.com/closys. Share your experience with CloSYS and how it fits into your life.
;Yea I can send you some stuff. I'll DM you in a bit.
Some guy just told me I look like Marcia Cross and then picked up my tab. Whatever, I'll take it!
#Larry is in the lead (':
publicly-biased? what do you mean?
time for a nap. (:
I want some damn candy
it's also 2 days until i turn 21, time to get faded! Just need to knock out this midterm i have later today
Not particularly. Those teams weren't as good as the Kings by the underlying numbers. LA was top 5 tm in Fenwick tied & close.
Limp biscuit
Oh no..the NBA has taken over Twitter. 😓
Middleton with 6 runs in the sixth inning to take an 11-3 lead over Madison East.
thanks! I think I'm towards the end of this cold.
There are eyes that fall in love with bleared ones. - Spanish Proverb
like wow
What's good?
Okay ! I find the problem ! I can follow again only If I have 1000 Followers !
Inside of the dullest exterior there is a drama, a comedy and a tragedy
It's always sunny! Beach ;)
Looking for a professional photographer in the Duluth, Mn area. Any have a recommendation?
Oh yea, things are so good in the economy $AMZN and $GS are fee falling. Shorts are working well. Retail is really slow now
Do you know how much DC misses you??
Our house needs a new scanner. Anyone totally psyched on one?
i think it's colder where you are ;)
Audacious Idea from Barbara Samuels of : If kids count, why not get them out of harm’s way?
": Do you still eat tuna out of the can??? Every time I open a,can I think of u lol #IneedToKnow" lol ur a mess
RT : #FutureOfTV game changer: 500m connected TVs will be delivered by 2015 – blurring the lines between TV and the Web.
Wait this chick calls herself the gangster nancy sinatra? Serious? Too much instagram too little book.
Monitor compliance with policies
well so is mine stoop trying to cause an argumentt.
Star Media suite RT where ur seats at?
Heya Kevin, big fan of the show. Shatner's bday is on thursday, and Nimoy's on monday. An "ask shat" is kinda obligatory..
Urban Renewal
Empower Network is back!
looks like it's going to get ugly with Kristen and Rachel this Sunday.
I noticed one of your comments on a HuffPo site, could I ask you some questions for an article? RT me if you're interested.
Thanks to everyone who showed us some love at today. And don't worry if you couldn't get a shirt we saved one for you. ;)
"He that will not apply new remedies must expect new evils; for time is the greatest innovator."~Francis Bacon
do you ever come down here and visit?
Beautiful weather here
I wish I was going!!!
yeah some bs!!
I think I solved this hacking issue. Srry again to anyone who got those annoying mssgs from "me."
Hearing British accents around me only makes me want an accent more.
I feel so great!!!
one would assume so.
I agree with that.
Halloween Weekend! One of the most entertaining times of the year! I'm partying as the one and only Ray Charles tonight! What will you be?
true, especially when it comes to baseball coverage by the media. And I ALWAYS feel better when football is off the table.
I always missed those carnivals....
damn, that's a lotta QA...
I'm sure you've seen video of Ellen Degeneres "auditioning" for the audiobook of 50 Shades of Grey?
Pizza and relaxing.... That's how it should be everyday :) lol
It's always nice to see familiar faces looking similarly awkward.
Yes - so happy about Undefeated. But I loved PINA.
Holy shit. It's amazing how much better of a mood I am in just being on a college campus instead of at work.
RT : Here's to letting go. And starting a new chapter.
Kari: "did you just say you're sick of watching me do my hair? Rude" Swede: "no I said I'm so tired, I just stare at your hair" Lmao
totally jealous of you right now!
Ah, you finally gave it a listen. Thanks man, glad you liked it! Shout out to
Oh, a rain delay, you say? Perhaps I will still get to see the game. Yes, I just may.
It's not who you know, it's who knows you.
I could be your buzz lightyear, fly across the globe.
#presidentialDebate Gabriel Quadri "tonight we see a debate between 3 polititians and a citizen (candidate)"
bored. Think ima dye my hair again
We used to think Pandas we cute... Until Google adopted a Kungfu one! Death by Panda is real for websites!
yeah yeah i know...ive been told one too many times
kidding!! Hope to meet you guys there!
no. those must be new. i don't remember square ones, just the ones for spec. opps
Banctec is at the InterContinental Hotel in Dallas for #TEXPO, come check out iBPO at our booth!
Are you going to BBall Friday? Come see us we have some shirts for you
yo philly looks small from here
Dow is down because of T-Pryor...everything is going to hell
#FF is a bilingual community newspaper produced by its youth - por y para la comunidad.
i KNOW it would, biffle. RT : I think the Florida sun would help :)
Ridiculously, I say this to an audience of people I probably wouldn't want to wring the necks of.
Can't wait to watch!! HUGS :)
Just π will be @ 13th and Coronada today @ 12noon. Stop by for your free sample of sweet potatoe pie! YUM!
At the DECA area competition and I'm practically shitting myself.
completely with you on that.
San Diego wooden boat fest this weekend at koehler kraft shelter island sat and sun
yeah but still...
Bored out of my mind....I'm starting to get sleepy
From a history teacher standpoint let me make a prediction-the fall of Steve Perry will be large, proportional to his vitriol vs teachers.
M so tired and full
i hear you got to work with my friend Sabrina on that luggage show :)
Playoffs? RT : Bears win ! welcome back football ...
ugh thank you...hey im so high I forgot what we were talking bout!!! What was again??? Lmao....
In deadpan Jim Jarmusch's Broken Flowers (2005), a solitary man stalks his past in search of a secret son and his last chance for future joy
when you back in GR? WLC is there right now for a game vs Calvin. you could meet sid comrade !
What on earth is a Paczki?! A delightful bite of heaven, available at Deangelis Donuts March 4-8th! Call in and place your orders now!
Goin to Enzo...a great pizza place in the Bishop Arts District for a good friend's 40th....
I will start studying after in back from swimming:Lxxx.
When was the last time the O's won back to back series in New York and Boston?
Bacon dip in chocolate.....aw epic....
#nowplaying the bled-silent treatment
Jack: look at this video of a baby panda sneezin Liz: thats the cutest thing ive eve seen Jack: ik... U need2 fire 10% of ur staf
You lucky face
Let us know how you liked it!
it was a really fun show! Great seeing you too!
"Bro I've already stopped listening to you, and given you the money. Just let me listen to my viking song."
Dreams seriously freak me out.
Amen! RT: To #JimTheCop is human, get human and sing the Anthem at the top of your lungs is be
Wedding picture DVD has arrived!
hey sis! Yes its so nice out here ! Love it..
Prediction for Saturday - 3 / Revolution 1. Boyd gets a brace for the game.
Sometimes its not even worth trying anymore.
214.15Mb from 306.06Mb of Boyce Avenue. oh yes, I used people's card. Im not a pirate no?.
Thanks for the mention!
when u wanna be
Planning to go to Five Points at 30 Mott Street for return to the stage of the fast light guitar fingers of Michael Hsu.
why not?? We can do another day-want to see you too!!
We are currently briefing the panelists for the IAP photography panel. We will begin the panel in 15 minutes.
Suggestions for how you may volunteer for Congo Run this Fall:Guest Blogging,Advertise at Hospitals,Advertise in colleges etc
Howdy,Oregon is garbage!
Thank you for the RT. We have some truly amazing volunteers world-wide helping kids grow critical-thinking & creativity skills!
Escape to the beach Tuesday! Rum Buckets, Skinny Lemonade, King Cake, Live Music, Steel Drums, Gumbo, Margaritas, & Mojitos!
I have been enjoying Battleground too. Though the Office parallels are sometimes distracting.
Gonna go to the beach with the bestie in two weeks! Her parents are going all out for her bday. They rich af too #excited !!!!!!
I know. Seriously
We Haven't Talked in Forever
i won't stop loving till February 30th . There is no February 30th <3
I want to work in the mail room. They have mastered the art of internet article reading.
#SophomoreYearTaughtMe in never going to use geometry in my life.
I'M FOLLOWING YOU!!! SHOUT -OUT !!! HEHE :)
Awkward couples are so funny. Holding hands hands isn't supposed to be uncomfortable.
Rico got da sack
Right? What a loser 8)
Bring back the liberal arts in my liberal arts college.
The gays in front of me are def enjoying each other, but not as much as I'm enjoying my bf for the night: this box of Butterfinger Minis.
Breaking out the snow boots!!
The noise of the wheels does not measure the load in the wagon.
Finally. A part of modern prostitution.
While "LOCAL" is certainly a flexible term, the basic concept is simple: local foods/products are produced/made as close to home as possibl…
Look! It's a bird, a bee, a butterfly! Learn from a garden coach how to build a garden to attract these creatures. Sat 4/14 1-3:00 @ Nanini.
Mixtape w josh Phillips this weekend. Can't wait for this shit to get goin
And high up above or down below When you're too in love to let it go But if you never try you'll never know Just what you're worth
Yes. Like so many other things in writing a novel. :)
Had a terrific Peking Duck at the Peking Duck House, now off to see several clients in new musical version of "Pippi Longstocking"
RT Creativity is a key property of all living systems and contributes to natureʻs inherent ability to sustain life - Fritof Capra
Dont let anyone dull your sparkle <3
I almost don't rememer life without #DVR. How primitive.
It's ironic that on the day I donate blood, my AP bio homework is on heart functions and blood..
this week video girl the movie at barrywoods in kansas city, amc jersey gardens in elizabeth, NJ
Not one cent should be raised unless it is in accord with the law.- Napoleon Bonaparte
Might be first time I had a really crap day and knew I should go exercise and actually did!! Guess this is working for me. For now.
"One man's trash is another man's treasure" -great saying, horrendous slogan for an adoption agency
: that's awesome...looking forward to checking it out when your done!
Maybe you shouldn't have cheated like an idiot. She would still be around if you didn't fuck up. So gtfo.
Look forward to reading “: Just ended #innovation telecon w on his new book, The Coming Prosperity. A great read!”
thanks for the Shout Out Bud!
What is everyone dressing up as this Halloween?
To honor Zayn's return to US tour I'm giving away MY autographed lanyard! Will tweet a SECRET link in next 24 hrs!
What's the record for "Most tape used wrapping a small gift?" because I'm pretty sure I just broke it.
The Silk Tie likes Jaymes! We think we have a great idea, is our idea crazy?
Tornado on the ground in Jackson Co... a strong line of storms is sweeping across southern MN. We'll keep you in the loop on Fox @ Five.
damn! I wasn't there again
RT : "Our job is a hell of a lot harder than it was five years ago." {{entire panel chuckles}}
"The future cannot be predicted, but futures can be invented."
Fw: Child ID Flyer
The two scales at anytime are 9 pounds off of eachother.
Just got 100/100 on my first software development assignment!
I know some panty inspectors. “: Anyone know a good home inspector? Need to get one done.”
Tic Toc Tic Toc... we can't wait! #Monicals RT : T-minus 5 days till !!!
UNFOLLOWED or WORSE...OFF WITH MY HEAD :/
Say my name, say my name when no one is around you say baby I love you!!!
You don't have to be a geek to love your Mac either :) (Hugging MacBook)
it's a "compliment" wrapped around a hundred layers of insult
I feel like "the water boy" 2day as I get ready for Sunday & look at old pics...I LOVE MY MOMMA!! Haha
In just a matter of days, states like Nevada and New Jersey have ramped up their efforts to pass legislation for online poker!
missed you tonight…my day was that much more empty
Good! How about you?(:
The plastics and polymers are uses to bring sheen, lift, and volume. These elements tend to get on the scalp and build a plastic coat.
I hope the cowboys keep screwing up:)
Q from senior to #Zimbabwe youth: "What will you pursue for your future? Would you be interested in coming to the US?"
Miss coaching baseball and soccer.
"Time for President Obama to submit all three job-creating trade bills" <-- means its almost time for you to say Y they suck
correct me if i'm wrong.i'm not sure who said it.we let Cody (babyface) Ross go because we belive in Cameron Maybin.
31 pages of story boarding for act 1 of #TheRedRider! ... If a picture is worth a thousand words...
Yes school was in
When are you coming to Chicago? The city is bursting at the seams with stories ready to be told by the brilliant Henry Pacheco
can you please follow me :) ♥♥
YESS!! Finally bout to leave , I'M TIED "/ ALL :-)'s now
Anyone wanna help us out by attending our next shoot?
Have I told you the joke about the tall wall. I probably shouldn't. You might not get over it.
Oh hi fever, where'd you come from? That's cool, now please go away
And now is weighing in on 's Twitter/social media expenses ...
You can get the knack very quickly! They have the same shortcuts as blogger I believe. Go for it! Looks great!
FACT. MT “: In my very humble opinion, Beastie Boys album "Paul's Boutique" is not only my fave, but their finest production”
I just know it will be haha
Guess what I get to do for work this afternoon - go to at to go see an octopus! (named after ) SO fun!
Does it seem like Hootsuite makes updates throughout the day, every day? I'm always getting msges to reload the dashboard b/c of changes!
: Garmin Nüviphone for Android has a lot going for it. Is it threatened by Nexus 1's free turn-by-turn tho? That's the kwestch.
Chicago Bears sign draft pick Alshon Jeffery
Controversial! Personally, I think we should have a 'buy your own' policy with Wi Fi throughout plus an additional allowance.
thanks! I might rework my "digital projects" section to something that will also accommodate it.
My brother is filling out his graduation cards. Can't believe he's graduating college already.
15 weeks this week...thank you! Due Nov 1st, and can't wait!
SHE SAID RIGHT NOW IS NOT THE TIME SO IMMA GO GRAB A COUPLE THOTS INTELL ITS TIME FOR ME TO RETURN HOME.
you got "Prospective" 30/1 odds
Dept Homeland Security bldg across the street has a suspicious device. Everything is blocked off. I can't get anywhere. I'm hungry.
Concert today :D
follow live coverage of #assistantopinionretreat via twitter with
anytime I love wisdom! Have a great day and an amazing week!
Linen Pants x TOMS = SPING
C-USA set to make press release tomorrow @ 10am, followed by UTSA presser at 1030 in Harris room of UC.
AMEN, sister. Exactly.
Put another on the board. I'm in!
I have decided that I do not want to sit around and wait for opportunties and/or people. I am MAKING things happen 4 me
": Stay trippy mane" you gonna celebrate Juicy Js birthday? Haha
Hey Pam. Still looking for comedy reels?
everyone here sends their condolences to you and the rest of the Dunn family.
Congratulations to and ! I love that you know so many pacifists (3 of us brought Ferdinand the Bull as gifts for the baby)!
got to Dollar Tree and found it is closed. And me with most of Christmas shopping to do. Sigh.
The Goddess, or one of 'em, heard my plea about the rain...and so glad we have enough snowpack in Northern CA finally.
Carmelo was about ready to open-hand slap someone
oh my goodness this is awful! Her poor parents must be beside themselves. Truly hoping she's ok.
Awww, thanks, Patricia!! Happy mother's day to you, too!
another great article! the upcoming elections should be very interesting
The only journey is the journey within. Rainer Maria Rilke
GTL all complete by 9am. Guess that's one positive thing about being woken up by a ginormous moth bouncing on my face at 3am.
Off to break in my new candy pink PS3 controller with some Modern Warfare 2 :D
Just checked your Tumblr. Go read Brideshead! There are also memory, college hijinks, and architecture. And ocean liners and ...
tory keep yo Dreds and Jersey! Ur so fast that's all DBs can catch!! Blowin in the draft behind u!
She play the games like one of his homies.
u know it's still up in the air but I know I'm going to someone's bar and getting drunk LOL
Nervous about my cousin's teacher having my flash drive that has all my pictures in it. Maybe the woman's stupid & deletes it all?!
": "Where's my navajaaaaaaaa??" " aye got that shit right here
aww! Thanks for the tweet!!! We heart you!!! Xoxo
Love it :)
I hope you have a great weekend.
I don't say this about most movies but I could 'Think Like A Man' again for all of the sexy Black Women in it. Regina Hall is my favorite!
Come on up in the Pit and workout for free your 1st time. Get instantly motivated after walking in.
Never regret anything because at one time, it was exactly what you wanted.
And had a blast! Milwaukee Bay Challenge 2nd Overall (via )
I have tomorrow morning off and I'm off at 10 tonight. What's going on, guys?
Think someone hacked acct! YOU don't need to worry about weight loss. Glad to see ya!
Don't laugh..... Acting but I ain't going. When I had sign up I thought they wud not call me. I was just bored at the time
Facing the consequences from being at the track all weekend.
Topeka Thunder must have stayed home KC Bulldogs 17 Topeka Thunder 0. Twelve min to go in the 1st quarter.
Listening to trust issues
The key is moderation, not denial. :)
Super crazy head-explode-y congratulations to for her NBC Pilot, Chicago Fire, being picked up. So very proud!
Deposit check, possible jog, bottle of Jack
We Will Never Forget and they will never stop giving us reasons to remember. #godblessamerica and god help them if they try that shit again.
Hey, if is a Doctor, I'm a fuckin rocket scientist!
I like pizza
Jeepers! I didn't know you are on Twitter! Yes- it was nice waving to you on Monday! Smooch!
fuck up individuals aren't we!
I will have that answer for you later today we are meeting tonight at 8 to discuss deals for
if you got an egg for your twitter icon
- that place was/is so nasty.
Big hugs my new pageant sister ! Thanks for following me love and I can't wait to meet you in July! Xoxo
At Least Nobody Bugs You About Reaching Far Ass Shit.
So... I just need an extended battery! GREAT!
23-10 with 4 minutes left. Lets go #Nighthawks!
I did it! Roscoe's chicken & waffles for the 1st time! Yum! Thanks for a great start at 9a this morning Tory Thompson and Dino Scofield! :)
FOLLOW ME?! IM YOUR GUITAR<3 i know ya love me....i know ya care just shout whenever & ill be there! lolollololol
Craigslist Founder will Donate $1 to National Wildlife Federation if you use
I'm exhausted .
You were created to be you, so feel good about yourself.
What a beautiful morning! Just take a look outside at the sunshine! It's such a wonderful week! Here comes the weekend! :)
Thanks for the follow, and congratulations on your success, Jill!
Thank you!
Thank you, welcome to you also. What do you do?
You are welcome! It's good to connect! Hope you are having a great day!
Jealous of all those headed to #sxsw. Austin is an awesome city :)
You scare me...so we are even...
Do you even feel like ur being watched?
It seems like everyone is making something of their life, and I'm just here laying around.
taking a 3hour lunch break. lol, yea... I do it
thats so cool! and a friend of mine got mine for me. if you dont mind me asking, but how old are you?
yay! I already got mine but a friend wanted to know! Can't wait to see ya! 😄
Survived jury duty Day 2 w/Poets on Teaching: A Sourcebook, feat., among othrs, , , , ,
damn straight
I should prolly tweet more but I never get retweeted isn't that the point here lol
On to the next one...
misses you around the building.
same here-_-some say"are you talking about those asian people again"or"whats with you and those asian people your obsessed with"
Aw, hi! Thanks for remembering me! I'm doing alright but had to vanish a while for teh crazy life. How are you!?
lol it was a girl and getting it in with don i take that as she likes hotdogs not tacos ;D
If marriage is your object, you'd better start loving your subject.
Follow us for GWCC food and beverage specials throughout the week
i will cuddle tonight.
: I definitely make enough of a mess to at least appear to be channeling him!
I just noticed that my profile is missing several months worth of tweets? What's up with that? Now, there's big gaps in my life!
I try but he convinces me to shave cause if not he'll go and attack my great grandmas cousins neighbors sister-in-laws dog.
😳 are your parents crazy?! That's way too late.
I miss being 15
That is to say gutting contribution LIMITS.
She call me monster cuz i make her scream in the dark!!!!
New Sign Idea: "Please don't eat the headphones" ? kid wrecked a pair by practically chewing through the cord
“: Gonna b a gr8 nite for my show out at Harborview Marina here in North VA-BH” On my way!!
aha;)he does:)
#ShoutOut to and
That's exactly what I said! loves it!
Honestly, I think you like little boys
Could be said to anyone running behind you .... ": your view much better :) ”
December 21st presents at with special judge . Doors open at 7pm, show starts at 8pm
Pick up line of the night: you're eyes are magical
Check out Dave Blair's new music vid for "New Day Dawning"...!
sounds like you are in the Fort?
fine...we can watch american juggalo...its a great film
I'm doing great! How are you? Hope you have some fun weekend plans=)
is a cool SF brand engagement agency. Really innovative ideas to create relevant ad copy and messaging using social analytics
I could care less how Teddy feels, they were guilty & got a slap on the wrist compared to some of the punishments given out now
RT “: Once they stop talking to you they start talking about you”
yeah, it's a "new" cup...lookin all busted with grease stains...#fuckouttahere! Lol U lucky I don't work the register..
I just read that as "& she scissored Jesus"...
where are you at ? RT : I MISS YOU TOO FUCK WITH ME SOMETIME LIKE TODAY
How is everyone doing?
Seriously wish I could just put Taylor to bed now & knock out! So exhausted
her face today when she yelled though.. LMFAO I WAS CRYING! 😂 & hay slut 🎀
We're back on the oven tomorrow. Sansome and Pine, 11:30-2pm
lol..lucky ass..
Glad im not no weak Bitch!!!!!!
The brother walks in puts his hands on my face and says are they cold, I was warm until he came in...
“: If you're the smartest person in the room change rooms!”
I will think about it
My waffles are the bees knees. (;
I like the less exercise part. :P
Not only is it 20th Century thinking, but it still is the dominant economic model our leading politicians.
you have the best damn chicken wings ever. we like to take them to the drive in.
Y'know, as a native of LA, I fail to see why anyone would live there instead of Seattle. I know, work. But still... ;)
It’s a perfect day for ______ #icecream!
I am loving your book, sweetie! Glad you are in a better place/space. Stay strong!
We encountered an issue with some server updates that brought down our main storage server. It may not be up until tomorrow. We apologize!
I don't have nothing to regret at all in the past, except that I might've unintentionally hurt somebody else or something. - Jimi Hendrix
Honoring our wounded soldiers tonight... You can too. Visit www.woundedwarriorproject.org
Nice job tonite by , , , , , & our favorite Aussie,
Today's Sandwich: Tuna salad on a croissant w/ lettuce, tomato, provolone cheese & a cup of soup..$6.95 *Chili & Chowder 50 cents extra
yep. It's true you hate me.
I can't believe its already march next week.. Time flies too quick!
Omg go away hiccups
BibleFax: B4 th exile(586-36BCE)most Israelites not monotheists! Yahweh was a terrific warrior, but wht did he know bout making crops grow?
can I get my CD now LOL
lol. Yeah. Y? U didn't tell me you were going
I really have nothing to say, but I am saying it alot
I LOVE YOU MORE LOVEY!!! :) xoxo ALWAYS REMEMBER THAT!! <3
If I get wet today were fighting
Nothing like being stuck in a parking garage!
One of the greatest feelings in the world. I miss it, but unfortunately, not enough to get my ass back in the gym. Yet.
where would you put your coffee? are there cupholders in your giant hamster ball?
NO YOU DON'T
Taking my Morning Doo-Doo.. Todays color is Khaki. Looks like imma have a Good Day today! :)
Let's go buy the flying lawnmower
I couldn't let anybody badmouth donuts, even on behalf of their cousins who retained the original spelling from the old country.
ill come take care of you (:
“: Damn I never thought it would become this hard this fast.” that's what she said. :)
your words mean more than words
#night #photography is pretty fun lol haven't shot long exposures in a while.
No Air is what im singing.. :)
Hey Elle, I just messaged you information about Peace Day 2011. It is in 3 messages. THANK YOU so much!!!
We aren't promoting it, we are bucking it. /duckface
Jacket Backers Game Watching Party going on now at
Boston all the way
When someone says "Love it or leave it", They're really saying you don't have the right to change things your government is doing.
listening to the Dalai Lama chanting... amazing how powerful the words are and I don't even understand the language.
The Suns tonight
Golden Doodle :)!
Looking forward to seeing some amazing shots! Thnx evry1
Very Nice article in Alb The Magazine this month
Maybe Ginsberg can get Scalia's backing after one of their opera dates or something.
Hm definitely Chicken Kabob for lunch #Greek...iThink lol
- Something Isn't Right !!!
Also, this woman was completely obsessed with the hair band Nelson. But I think that was actually just her cultivated, quirky schtick.
oh that's awesome (:
Getting new covers for my phone #winning ❤
Adrian Gonzalez is no Paul O'Niell.
Another early start at work. #Leggo!
yea I'm down here right now in line for a poster right now with my son
That which is worthwhile IS worth the extra effort. Give it All you got! It's just when you think it won't happen that it DOES
Haha well thanks! You're awesome too, I love your tweets
uh, no, i wasnt talking about u, i was tlkng about this girl, nashieka in my science class, y did u think tht?
maybe... I don't wanna get in trouble with my dad :p he says it's strictly for school people
Yea Dale Winters
Advice to my buddy, "Don't worry - you're in the opening scene of a hilarious movie. You'll be fine by Act I."
What's up George, are you still interested?
Cavalli dress, and high heels with a drop top on hot wheels.
If you want something simple, use garage band, set it to voice and then hit record.
Step into the living room and I'm just going to ignore how all the cat's toys are on the dog's blanket.
RT So, one race to go, District 8, Pasch (D) v. Darling (R) for control of the Wisconsin State Senate.
Topics of discussion included the Harriet Fulbright College teacher program as well as the Summer School Program.
Ask An Expert Mondays: Can you wait 4 more days to ask questions to our experts?
one of the teams that are on the brink of elimination will go on to win their series. Why can't it be
how do I find out if I can catch an early flight home?
I don't know if you should be comforted or scared that your body handled that much alcohol.
Lol yes tht VERY MCH is how i feel , along with sum other explicit thoughts (; LMAO
I'm a teenager. I text at the speed of light, listen to my music too loud, roll my eyes, fall in love easily & get my heart broken.
Good Luck Buddy!
They currently have soy lecithin in the chips but great timing: I have sourced soy-free chips for 2012! Stay tuned and thank you!
That is awesome, thx! RT : Feels so good! My Jan donations went to , , &
A heart-how shall I say?-too soon made glad,
An instructor once told me that when there's resistence in your body, it's only because of the resistance in your mind.LET GO. Lisa Bonet
where to?(:
you're the shit!!
so start partying with professionals. duh
You follow him around like a little puppy. He does not like you!
If you think you are too small to make an impact, try sleeping in a room with a few mosquitoes. ~ West African proverb
ghost i tell u
S/o to all 4,066 of you #BoonDockKingz followers!! Yall are a big part of this! Lets make this year one to remember!!
"Starve a bully, Feed your soul." The wises words I ever heard from anyone.
top 5 highlights on the show HS interviewing Roger Waters? You looked genuinely happy...
#yobitv cool t.v. like the way its going
The Los Angeles Review of Books: Getting real tomorrow (7am Eastern/4am Pacific). Read it and weep.
3/25/1784->J. Craik:I had rather glide gently down the stream of life, leaving it to posterity to think & say what they please of me...
he said take my hand, live while you can, don't you see your dreams lie right in the palm of your hand.
Jason Mraz's new album, Love Is A Four Letter Word, is amazing
i do that to my brother at least once a week. do it!!
Dear Tapjoy, i erased your games and i am still getting your junk ads.... You guys suck and are sneaky little shits
Word, my brotha from my motha. ;)
#Worldseries Let's go
Not able to Attend conference? Follow along via twitter -
Trying to keep up here: is "Swiss" the new euphemism for "gay"?
Hi Tevis! I'm right now studying at Harvard and am steeped in study - tweeting thru a lecture on linguistics right now. How RU
If you're taking advantage of this #NewEngland #weather and going #skiing, forget the car and PM us for info on a ride today!
I'm going to kill someone in school today.
Another day in national credit card Empire expanding with public unconditionally proud of Superpower status with Might makes Right Mindset.
✔ Above the influence.
Pickup Line: You're ugly but you intrigue me.
Please tell me how I can make Teen Hoot better for the fans??
gurllll good choice (;
It's a #meatloaf kind of night.
is bout to shock the world
RT : Finally saw Anthony Davis twin sister.. Disappointed she doesn't have a unibrow.
...anyone needing a workout buddy in Chicago?! Help!
thats brett for ya. that was a stupid waste of a timeout. stupid calls he makes.
Great! Pretty exciting stuff! :)
Good job Bucky! It's up to MU now!
A Texas-Cal Holiday Bowl means 4 weeks of whining by Cal fans about Mack's smack in '04. ... Gonna love every second of it.
Who on earth is Sarah Phillips??!!
Thank you for sharing. We are very excited about the Tangerine Tango, but then again who isn't :)
we need more #3day_weekends. Write your legislature, start a grassroots movement
They wanna hate me
Roman dads are powerful, w/lifelong responsibility, but life expectancy was short--by age 25, there's 2/3 chance father is dead
Who comes out worse or ? Probably both.
chubbys sounds so good right now 😍
Thank you and for the RTs!
Ron Paul is trending!
You know summer is starting when people just show up randomly at my house
No-hitter in Anaheim! Jered Weaver. Awesome when it happens.
Your health is your greatest wealth, so start investing in it today.
In the mood for a "Spring Fling"...come enjoy this lightly hopped, crisp copper ale from Blue Point...perfect for losing the winter blues...
thanks for the follow
take me home, i don't wanna be alone tonight<3
Oh look, 200 followers. #homeworkcomplete can I still get points for Marketing??
me too. Just doesn't feel right...
Why not just hit Montero here? They r up 2
Then the bus taking forever to come back.
It's just a job. Grass grows, birds fly, waves pound the sand. I beat people up.-- Muhammad Ali
So Bullies are real tough when dealing with a 17 y/o. How about bringing that to me and lets see how i deal with you. U have no control!
Just dropped a line to AppThat, but realized it was you I'd really like to chat with about project idea. Contact info?
thank you! Awww. So sweet. <3
"this #streetpizza ain't gonna eat itself" - offering me the last slice.
Are there repressed issues you have that you feel a need to discuss by posting that tweet?
I wonder how it must feel to live in your little sisters shadow, cunt.
Wishing... Kayla to Chicago with No.23 pick
the joys of getting older :) Oh well! :)
Ok I heard Emma's his ex? Don't think that's true. The pic looked pretty recent
So do you think clouds should be rooted in ISP? Region? Personal network - as if?
It was different from a $20 steak but not much different from a $40-$50 steak.
Great conversation yesterday; barbershop talk was excellent; needs to be many more; followed by unity and action.
Trying to write something beautiful for you fellows
We'll never be perfect but we're WORTH it-worth all God has 4 us. Believe it tdy. Get rid of ANYthing stopping u from living in God's will.
To be honest .. That year drop was ment for you ...
Goodnight, my beautiful and whimsical world. May you never run out of surprises.
on a side note... Thank god for my tenacity - not a lot to laugh about at 4am without those cheesy pick up lines :-P
Go Ducks!!!
T-Minus not-that-long until I strap on my stretch pants and reunite with this weekend.
REALLY THE GUY KILLED HIMSELF .SAD BUT THERE WAS HELP HE QUIT LIFE!!!!
we can't be the boss as long as the system is based on raising the most funds. & we can't change that system until we're boss.
ok, so i'll probably be a hatefull cunt tonight, and i don't really give a fuck, so if you're expecting niceness. no. fuck you.
that's a good mantra. Trying to enjoy his little self as much as possible, even at 4 a.m. :)
Haha I suppose I never thought it would endure to this day. Plus, it's gross. :-)
Listening to race on my old timey radio. Can't help watching it, then feel silly. Enjoying last of sun's warmth + light 4 the day
Austin we really appreciate you following Poised Creation on Twitter!! :)
REAL STEEL WAS A GOOD ASS MOVIE!!!
My dog was just having a dream where, instead of twitching his paws and yipping, he wagged his tail ferociously.
When I was 5 I wanted to jump in the tv and whoop the guy that punches George Strait in pure country. 20 years later...ain't changed
Thanks! It was sweet and I love those purple guys too :)
Really? I have to wait to be seated b/c my "party" hasn't arrived? But you have 20 open tables?!?
dude, where are you? I'm here.
Girls made a salad tonight from cilantro, chives, lettuce growing in the yard.
Reading tweets makes twitter totally worth it for me.
that was me and my 2 sisters growing up :) drama lol we've always been super close and are best friends even as adults!
hell yes u are bud
Kobe fisher doesn't play for the Lakers, anymore. Don't throw him the ball.
Over the past 200 years, the wheel of history and ideas has turned. We decided to return home --Dror Eydar
My faux hawk is back!
R u sayn that u actually luv me or r u sayn it like black ppl luv chicken...hum I wonder lol I started asking do u like my nail poish lol
Great call by Bengals. Best matchup might be Gruden vs. Phillips.
I'm in pieces baby fix me, just shake me till you wake me from this bad dream<3
Going to try and sleep!
RT Thinking about the good work of No particular reason. Thank you for the awesome #SKC season Graham. Happy holidays!
RT : “Be presidents of each other's fan clubs.” - Tony Heath
Shannon Good Morning. ur Parent's Boat! :-
Here we go Bulls! #IBelieveThatWeWillWin let's beat those orange!
wow tbs better play this is all now at warped
sounds good haha
I would totally watch a prime time TV series, "Duncahhan" starring Jack Hannahan & Shelley Duncan as Miami Vice-esque duo .
3. Production has been moving out of the U.S well before 2008, and by Ford, Nissan, Honda and many others not bailed out.
I love how my crew always has my back 💘 even tho I can go alone . Nice to know I still have the same people to count on
LMAO at "right to arm bears" tshirt for sale at Milwaukee public market
Love You Jasminators!
HAPPY BIRTHDAY !!
"I wonder who I'm going to be sitting next to" "I bet you its mr.305" lmfao this guy looks like pibull xD
I'm here
congratulations jason
He's already got a new CD? I thought he just signed with MMC like today?
Been having much success with recent projects!!!! Looking forward to the upcoming journey! @
It's that time again! FIRST FRIDAY!!! The gallery will be open until 10 tonight
Cuatro de Mayo, baby! RT : This lady at the bar is ripping shots of tequilla already
In my head that's funny at least... I'm a duck.
Her toes are coming out the front.
i'm down
totally stumped with a podcast recording question: how to convert mono mic into stereo files?
are u at the game?
BARBIE I need a picture with a SUN TUBE! for the next edition...like a jocobs ladder pic...let me know, BYE DOLL
Kony couch potatoes lost
preciate ya bro!
summers coming
Im adding studs&spikes to some gear for upcoming shows. My mom tells me they sell spikes @ some fetish shop in central. thnx mom. weird.
shout out to you! you aren't cool if you're not following him! so might as well follow him!
Thanks, man. Letting that rant out before a lab accident turned it into my supervillain raison d'etre was a real relief.
Very drunk watching act a fool and post drunk tweets. Good times
just watched the keira knightly vid 4 coco mademoiselle. in the real world keira would be suing fotog for sexual intimidation on the job
hell yes and they are HUGE :) let's go soon please
It's that creepy overhead light that makes it!
It's too hot in this house!
If I had to get raped at some point I just hope it's by a ninja so I never even have to know about it.
two tests today & a quiz. #HonorsWorldHistory #HonorsBiology #HonorsEnglish9 oh no..
Just saw Apollo 18. :)
blah! That's a lie she swear she hard and ain't even bout it lol you dnt be around you " Jackie" like I do she a dang fake
Its official!! Reignwolf will be added to Sasquatch line-up! Any more bands you would like to see on there?
That Blazer game looked horrible! But seeing Brandon Roy's smiling face back in the RG was so great!
Interesting - any details? MT : #cosugi12 Baker & Taylor is taking accountability for the HarperCollins 26 is promising to fix it
feel about the same thinking of taking a semester off.
Don't forget to tune in and watch The Phantom of the Opera next Tuesday, March 6 at 8 pm on !
finally, SPRING BREAK!!! it's gunna be a good one! (:
practice up mang! "we sittin here talkin bout practice?!"
We're open for lunch and dinner....come out and visit us today!
Just gave away another copy of Fahrenheit 451 for free.
A cop just gave me $5. I took it. Today is weird but awesome.
Who has two thumbs and is already drenched in sweat?
InfiniteSkills - New InfiniteSkills Web Programming with Python Tutorial Harnesses Power of Object Oriented ...
Gift wrapping fundraiser at Barnes and Noble starts tomorrow!! 1939 Mount Zion Road, Morrow, GA 30260 #comevisit T/TH 11-4 (W 11-5)
i surrender.
Can't wait 2 c "Think Like a Man" I'm so there.. enjoying on Steve Harvey Morning Show..big fan :)
& Jesus loves us! its raining tonight so were not running the mile tomorrow <3
Such a great suggestion.
#SongsToPlayWhileHavingSex .. One Direction's What Makes You Beautiful :)
UMM I GOT THE GREATEST SHOW ON EARTH.. #MOVIE, but when u hear dese new songs you gone be looking like this $__$
That, or eating brown sugar and maple syrup out of the bottle.
awesome! Look forward to seeing it!
A big FICA YOU from Congress for Christmas!
I'm in a bar at a casino in AC. NHL 36 James Neal is on. Hahaha.
Walking speed correlated with pantent creation. Walk faster.
Seems like you guys should be able to do this with DigitalPulse since the functionality is already there for sprops and evars
There was a 4-car wreck in Mexico yesterday. 87 people died
Do you know someone struggling with depression, anger, marriage issues, etc. Please give us a call today.
yea- I have done websites and databases in the past.
Im Never OD'n Again Those Days Are Over!
": 11 straight games for Rodgers w/ at least 2 TD passes, and 11 straight w/passer rating over 110" if only he could do halftime show
It feels like I'm just losing everyone I love. I hate this. A lot.
Who's excited for fantasy NCAA basketball? Coming soon, but I guess we can settle for NCAA football for now...
thank you so much!!!
On my way to Huberts to hang out w/ , & for a Home Opener pre party, stop by & say hi!
Literary listings - Chicago Sun-Times
l hate when couples rub their relationship in your face.
havnt nobody seen me in years
We will have a fan upfront:) If you get a ticket we will give you a bracelet:)
Hi, do you still have an extra ticket?!
going to of course!
Way too much time!
Not clicking on any links from you. I know a lady that clicked on one & got a virus that turned her into a fundamentalist.
*Check out 's timeline of retweets. Twitter is awash with some nasty ungrateful whining little shits this Christmas.LAME
cant wait to get #COD to come out on itunes or i can juss get it in the store #OMFG i wanna meet you so badly come to #NYC soon
“: We are!! You have such a great hit. I love that song. :)” appreciate you!
#cleaning 🔫 me!
You're welcome. I hope it help. Goodnight!! It's almost 10:30 pm Tuesday over here. Work pa tomorrow.
nah bro. You wouldn't have any life!!!
This fool 👇hahaha
watch the video we just posted and see if we're close to you!
You know it
*earlier today* S:Look out the window C:What? S:Don't you see it? C:and what is it? S: It's us together in the near future
I like to snuggle with my body pillow
Getting hair done by the wonderful people at Can't wait to hit the dance floor tonight.
hey I heard you were from Oceanside... I was born at tri city hospital... Retweet?
“: Now playing the role as ”. What?! :0)
Sometimes drinking a beer down by the river is all a man needs to clear his head.
i love video chatting with friends! <3
Mistletoe is not an excuse for sexual assault.
Last night was Legen...wait for it...
Don't know what Moises Alou is doing besides shopping @ Scottsdale but he looks like he could still be pissed @ Bartman!
Tell Congress regarding #SOPA and #INTERNET #CENSORSHIP "End Piracy, Not Liberty" - RIGHT ON
Halftime in Syracuse. lead the 9-8
hi lets work out tomorrowwwwzzzz
#BestMemoryOf2011 was the time I and fun I got to have with
I need a ride home despately
That picture i just seen WHOA DERE !! >>>>>>>
Ambushed by a cloud of butterflies on 14th st. DC insects not all bad after all.
Breakfast meeting w Accelerent partners
Thought for the day: "Keep your mouth shut and your eyes wide open!"
I know it's not their fault personally, but where's the nearest Apple store employee so I can punch them in the face real quick?
agreed that some have, but often not late nite. So u say no room for innovation? They've crushed it? (they have delis too..)
you would think niggas be complementing the AVI cause that pic of you in that position.....we could do some thangs, follow me
When #grocery shopping, compare #costperounce. Often non-name brands offer the same quality at
Well then give me some love and don't come at me all wrong, look back at the time when you were new.
Beautiful day for some soccer then golf
Happy Mothers Day to all you beautiful, strong, loving, caring Mothers out there!
is pretty sure it's ok to be angry with a friend when he calls you at 12:45am when you've told him you planned to be asleep by eleven.
Was that the 'shortest # of links between pages' game? I, too, loved that game!
Clémence Poésy Is The New Face Of G-Star Raw ’s Spring Campaign Harry Potter star Clémence Poésy is fast becoming a big fashion nam
I knew I could provoke you :-)
Just saw someone drive down our street with their car door OPEN! I am pretty sure this is a very bad idea!
USA firm yes. Regards John.
you have to admit, i've been doing better though.
Seriously, Instagram is my new obsession.
haha im glad you like it
The name of the LORD is a strong tower; the righteous run to it and are safe. Proverbs 18:10
Find a heart that will love you at your worst and arms that will hold you at your weakest
Thank you! I also have a bearded one!!
If you're offering to teach us how to get 20000 twitter followers, and you only have 300 - rethink your plan.
#playoff"beard"
tax time comes too fast each year! not what i want to be doing on a sunday!
Just saw Jon Jay and Allen Craig at dinner.. Spring training is awesome!
Just corrected my misunderstanding of functional programming. Enlightenment.
Kevin Mullen of Community Plates, food for the homeless, will be on "The Rock of Talk" Morning Drive at 7:25AM. Tune in!...
The information you share is always great.Good to know that we are not alone working for good food for everyone!!
packing over 300 football goals to go out to Amazon and Shop Direct today! Arrrgghhh
They'll steer HER towards the expensive stuff. Then you'll buy THAT.
As if our logos couldn't get any worse... Whoever created this definitely proved me wrong!
Are you a glamour girl? You will LOVE the Canyon Group Glamour Girl pink robe available from www.rosegardenboutique.com! Great glam gift!
Big Big Big Big Big BOOTY BITCH !!!!
Excited to be putting the finishing touches on our Paul Williams project!
Didn't know Punto had Middlebrook's number. But any number change would indicate he's sticking around!
how could i not? that pug in a tux is too much to resist! so classy.
That's what capital markets are for. Or mergers.
Good morning! Preparing for tomorrow's session debate on Medicaid!
Shout out to my newest follower the one and only
I hate pants omg
sadly, I am too.
Not looking fwd to school Tomo. So ready for this semester to be over!
Was good Yoo!
I guess I met you for a reason, only time can tell.
Um did you change your #, Sir?? I tried calling but it wouldn't go thru :T
Full service luxury office, providing you with all the necessary material for business development.
RT : . is such wonderful team, incredible hosts! Gracias!
You take on the responsibility for making your dream a reality. – Les Brown
Chem=hurting my brain :( so ready for summer
With regulation we can prosecute them. Deregulation made what they did not "criminal".. just morally reprehensible.
What's going on?
it can be enjoyable as long as you remember that anonymous ppl are prone to mean comments. Stick with ppl who own it.
idiot? Ha.. I just know an annoying orange dork who thinks he's part of the team showed up during the WCF in '10 as the "#1 fan"
I was in absolute awe at Pau's performance last night. He stepped up when his team needed him the most & delivered. That's what stars do
Courtney would quit the #Bachelor right now if they made her jump off of a cliff.
love those. Hard to find though.
if you feel just like a tourist in the city you were born, then it's time to go
go brewers!
I Hate When U Act Off Ugh Get It Together!!
how serious is the surgery?
Salsa Wednesdays is so much fun! Really thankful for this event! People dance, drink & truly enjoy themselves...
If you are not happy just remember this the bliss we feel when we are up is the bliss we can feel when we are down just choose happiness.
FOLLOW ME BACK:) 61
Learn from your mistakes
That will be perfect! Super close. Hope you have a smooth move and see you next session!
Hi Jawar...hope all is well with you. LTNS
how to disable iphone notifications: settings > general > sound effects > change it to off or headphones only. :)
Twit-R-Done!
I couldnt get the epsilen mail to work so i emailed Mrs. Warner and Dropped it with both of our names on it! =)
Not everyone who knows you, will know your value or worth. Who cares! as long as YOU KNOW, you will draw others to YOU, who do.
Glad to hear you’re a fan! RT: Sunbelt Oats and Honey granola bars!!!! >>>>>>>>>>
wow! U can't ever cut this man a break. Do u REALLY think he doesn't kno the dif btween Asia and Hawaii? He's human not God
First say to yourself what you would be; and then do what you have to do.
a little late but thanks for the retweets and follow
I don't know men
:) <3 what are you doing tonight?
Listening to The Builders and the Butchers while laying back in my hammock. Love it when I can get outside and relax!
Haley Reinhart Is 'The Bomb,' Randy Jackson Says, Downplaying Feud
Happy Bday niece! Auntie love u! And watch ur mouth; u r not grown yet ma'am. RT It my muthafuckin #Birthday!!!!
Getting pretty close to being done with Episode 4 — Pretty excited to share this with y'all.
Just got the Georgia dress in sunrust and it is STUNNING! Thanks for making such awesome, fun, unique clothes!
is in 's Audience Sell-Out Challenge tonight. 1/2 price tix. If we sell out, 1/2 price tix next wk. Ad infinitum.
I did fall for your hunger games post in pintrest though
So excited to work with from #acutabove today at the Amway Arena! Let's rock this house!
The Cabin In the Cotton (1932).
Never again will I ever buy another bullshit piece of junk phone. Unless one day I decide that I could really use an aneurysm.
Great clip. You don't see this happening today...
LoveJoy, Peace,Patience,Kindness,Faithfulness,Gentelness and Self Control #Thingsthat get me through the day
what type of short video?
I can't believe I missed 's great news last night! But now I saw them, I'll tell you I'm EXCITED about #PutYourHeartsUp ♡
hell yea.
Well aren't you the sweetest ever?! Wait, don't have time to talk, must write speech.
thinking about how cold it is outside....bbbrrrr
That the good rev doesn't recognize the grace PBO shows.... meh....
I want to hear about it!
"One can have no smaller or greater mastery than mastery of oneself." ~da Vinci
well bye guyz i am going 2 a reserant ugh i dont really want 2 go but i hav 2 go but :( still
Hey hussy, when your perfume overpowers the smoldering cloves in the glass, you are officially wearing too much.
texted me back! made my day!
Breaking: As Per Clinton Agreement, Kim Jong-Il Comes To Retrieve Obama Children (via )
'Children Behind The Wall' Documentary - Tijuana, Mexico
What has been your favorite job and why?
Danny Ainge shows more interest in the success of his team in one game than the entire #redsox front office has shown since 2004.
Stonewall, where grown man play.
What's the point spread of the faculty vs student game today at Brandon MS?
It's so dangerous tho........ Lol not
of course Braun leads off, worst case scenario when down 2
Thursdays , Trivia + $3.50 Trumer Pilsner Pints! Just read something on about you guys not being douchey. Congrats!
. Hope you enjoy INUKSHUK!
Thanks for the re-tweet!
I WANT TO omg :'( WHY JFK THOUGH LOGAN IS CLOSER GOSH
im Not That Girl: And You cant Please me Like you did Her #Charm comes Before Game so Run everything you just said back.
Mine just passed out and it's almost time to pick his big brother up from school...he's going to be fun
By my calculation, that should've taken you at least 12 hours! RT Just watched Blood In Blood Out two times in a row!!
#Cubs continue their struggling climb back to respectability with a 3-2 lead in the 2nd over the rival #Cardinals but Maholm is struggling.
babies & little mexicans ??? 😒
Essential Workflow Changes: Changes are expected and welcomed - via Michael Allen
Happy Thursday
Weekend finally here
I wish would use INSTAGRAM MORE OFTEN!! Lol:) #real #justsayin:)
- FINALLY got to seeing the live 30Rock shows. loved'em! can we see more Joey Montero please? that was the best ;)
Few women admit their age. Few men act theirs.
Too bad nobody else thinks so!
It's National Walking Day! We wont be mad if you happen to run though.
At the jail bailing someone out. Dam my phone cracking tonight.
turns out that the only thing Pepperidge Farm didn't remember is that I don't give a fuck
good hes mean. And im sorry but hes not that cute..... #justsayin. What did he do?
Congrats on getting your LOEX presentation accepted! You are rocking 2012! :)
yes yes you better !
An idea for your next winning product: Content Grader!
great post; couldn't agree more! just finished packing - i eliminated the maybes (so hard to do) & brought reusable clothing. ;)
its all good
A big thanks to the Metro State Roadrunners Volleyball Team for putting on a clinic for our Volleyball Players last night!
if you and your family are watching American Idol this year, send in the votes in support of she kills it!
Heading into Shade 45 right now to connect with on my #Occupy Book. Get Sirius. Tune in.
That was the best Mad Men commercial ever!
<---Shoulder is killing me.
darn it. Love Boat reunion show?
hope you get your iPad to behave! Have a Merry Christmas!
"When I rule the world, I'll plant flowers" ....on Earth Day!
Glad I'm not the only one...
Oh give me a freakin break
Thanks for
Any Group That Has The Name “Family” In It Are Dangerous…They Should Turn In Their Guns And Go Back To Being Dull.
52% retention rate among most #highered institutions.
American Bandstand.
William Wood teachers address board asking for 'civil and safe and environment'
Failed my test today, gonna retake tomrrow. Hopefully I will pass!
Sad irony is that broadcasters mentioned how lucky STL was avoiding rain/weather rest of country was getting.
Despite all the buzz about social media, email is still the top channel for most marketers...
lmao come get one
Yeah, it's weird. I wonder if she will end up killed off. I liked her last year & loved her battles with Maggie Smith haha.
I’m sorry, but even though bacon is tasty, I’d never order a “bacon milk shake.” Crazy. People are bizarre.
If Derek dies I will never watch #greys again my heart can't take this
Cantillon on tap?!?! Not fair.
Gosh April I still awake laying in her bed looking at her Mobil ! Goto sleep little baby ! It's bed time ha
NUCLEAR POWER IN SOUTHERN CA CAN WE AFFORD IT? July 12, 5:30, San Diego,Rsvp to Join ratepayers & discuss this topic RT
I am too tired to make my own alfredo sauce today. WHY is there not one alfredo sauce in a jar that tastes even remotely good?
Loving ecofriendly biodegradable baby products lowering the
#YouKnowLifeIsGreatWhen... 200 years ago a bunch of drunk mainers seized a brit man of war without any resistance. That's when your
talk to me
hey Brett are you going to be enshrined to the HOF in your home or away Vikings Jersey?
stoned listening to
not a problum
Ooooyeah...out here.
Thanks - right back at you!
Old folks wisdom: "Never get into an argument with a fool; outsiders looking in won't be able to tell the difference."
Recall that Alinsky was Jewish and worked in Chicago. Gingrich code: Stop the Blacks and the Jews. They are destroying America.
Received my first nature gallery wrap from yesterday and it's awesome!
bug mistake..
Last monday until next year
Hotel party time with the in the morning family!
Tweeting all day bc i dont have SHT else to do ^_^
Come to the #anatomy education and career workshop on Saturday at #AAPA2012, 2-3:30. Snacks and great advice!
If i looked like a tumblr girl i would never complain about life.
. You can't possibly be correct, because ANY firm would love to save 8% on their salaries by hiring only women.
I will never fly #Delta airlines. Outrageous. Heads up consumers.. #Whereisthecustomerservice?!
Throwing picks and texting Chicks.
4th grade boys love THE WAY THINGS WORK. Very visual, informative, and fun.
TAGsgf is at Come enter to win a Wii and answer trivia to win a shirt! Score updates at all day long. Follow!
Much obliged for keeping our #5x7social guests happy and hydrated!
Happy to follow you & we agree, we like twitter handle. Love unique twitter names & bios! Ours is biz.
Ppl...why do ppl who stay wit you and don't pay a dime in rent...always have shit to say....
all the other dogs will be jealous
#Scaliday extended: Brian Scalabrine will be used as a guest analyst with for the Bos/Philly series!
Thanks for including in your Subscription Smackdown panel this morning! Great convo and a HOT topic!
My god, it's like looking into a mirror! (I'm the old guy on the left right?)
what's your favorite character to draw?
what's up buddy. You was quiet..
“People that need constant reassurance are dreadful to be around.”
yooo my dude i need followers you got me!!!imma send you a vidgio lol
Don't forget, lifeguard training at Pulaski Pool tonight. 6 pm. RT to job seekers.
thanks my friend. happy to see another day
make sure to ask our friends for advice on Cake-Pops! Birthday Cake,Red Velvet,&Chocolate Covered Strawberry!
Happy Chinese New Year! I love having two new beginnings to the year, don't you?
Jeevo fans - this page is gone in 12 days and counting - pls like Jeevo's new fan page to keep up with his updates
I just want to chill in my bed, but school just has to get in the way. Yay.
We are pleased to announce is now
I wouldn't mind being stranded at home in a snow storm. But freezing rain? In February? Really Mother Nature?
Baby baby baby oh....lol yes I'm listening to Justin bieber
Hey & whoever, bowling and dinner next week?
Even a classic burrito can be diet-friendly at Taco Time NW – Just choose whole wheat, no cheese and mild salsa in place of dressing.
I would do both(:
YOU DID?! CONGRATS.
Role of books in our digital world, implications for Commons design?
Dj Nixx at The Place Tonite - We have been killing it on Mondays - gonna ROCK tonite with The Bruins in Town... $5 pizzas for game!
maybe im not sure - but are u saying that there is less hits when embedded than on the actual youtube site?
praying for me and my friends 2nite! <333
Calories - Little people who live in your closet who sew your clothes a little bit tighter every night
thats cool:) do you get discounts? lol
nah, he's a maniac. Did it jumping, somersaulting, and head first.
A lil tipsy off the keg .. 🍻
Swamp Donkey is currently providing that heavy heavy loud loud groove Drag Me Under is up next. Then
After today's big Ravens' win, remember to recycle all those bottles and cans - there should be a lot of them! Go Ravens!
I live in California :( i can't participate in the Triggerstreet competition :( any suggestions?
can't dm, but chris{underscore}beer{at}wgbh{dot}org
That makes sense...
THE SUPERMALL IS MAJOR I'M FROM AUBURN
Tonight is Industry Night. Half off of everything for all industry people! Cheers!
Write your SF Supervisors NOW re: BOS Files 120300 & 120301! Don't let Scott Weiner ruin our city by gutting Historic Preservation laws!
Thank you, lady!!
Good thing we got rid of that old mayor, because this new one has solved all of our snow problems! lol
procrastination fetish
Voki clsrm makes management of projects easy. Students don't have to sign up individually. Site a bit slow w/ updates at times.
I kinda wanna make an advice blog. So people can anonymously ask me for advice. I adore helping people c:
:) RT : I ordered my custom shirt from yesterday. I got a call that it's ready today! Talk about service!
. . .Sunglasses And Advil, Last Night Was Mad Real. . .
i agree! #ugh. i was cheering for Kacie B.
Watching University of Portland issue out a beat down to USF...Go Pilots
follow for great espresso
girl! I am delinquent-ly twittering this evening (am...) and regret to inform you I'm working tomorrow afternoon... como estas?
Hopefully this loss will quiet loudmouth #Kentucky fans.
If you say beer can with an english accent you also saying bacon in a jamaican accent.
Looking forward to The City Flea today!
With making our crowns
to think Granderson wanted to bunt for insurance...
25% on the way through with The Replacement Wife by Eileen Goudge. I should have finished this a week ago. Hopefully, review by Sunday.
At #nsvfsummit keynote: despite innovative tools and approaches, "We are losing our battle in the court of public opinion"
People think life has to be this way, but w/ God, your life doesn't have to be. Dynamite message from
Going to the 17th inning. Amazing.
HBO's #Girls is on. i'm trying to want to like it. still hasn't brought the awesome enough for me yet
I meant taller, actually. So some poor girl doesn't need to count the inches of sweaty air between her hand and his crotch
np. awesome default!
When tragedy happens it brings out the heroes in our community. I'm thankful for the positive words I have been hearing.
Turned out all we had to do was sit in our assigned chairs and listen to them tell us how to walk. I plan on starting the
I'm looking forward to May 18th.
#DMCA Mitch Singer from Sony talking about
:P yeah yeah and you blame it on me ;)
I think i shall wear my hair wavy for the rest of the school year...which is only 14 more days :D lol.
Funny you say that...I was already headed there myself! Count me in!
I Know Smebdy Gonna Want Me & To Slide On Dem Lata :)
Two years ago I was building a widget. Now I'm doing that once again.
grrrr. I hate being stuck! I'll wait another hour and see =P
Let me see him get that many tweets lol
i watching the bolog tv right now can you follow me :)
": Shouts to this bomb ass girl ha ha saw her last night positive person for real a favorite senior follow:)"
I WANT A CELEB TO GIVE ME A SHOUTOUT!
Nutshots are only funny when they happen to someone else
Goodnight Pittsburgh
COLE HITS THE WALK OFF SOLO SHOT IN THE BOTTOM OF THE 10TH!!!
DC Improv Comedy School Prom tonight. I can legally drink at this one. cc:
someone should ask him if he knows about Grenis when they go to a concert & make a poster that says we love your Grenis xD
Uhm Uncle Jesse is now playing drums with the Beach Boys ?!
What would you love to be doing?
Once you make it out the hole so called friends turn foes.
happy 4th..The beach is packed
(5/6) BUT - This discussion doesn’t actually go into that sort of analysis. It’s all sticker-shock and indignation.
Uggie as a seatmate/conversationalist at the White House Correspondents' Dinner > Lohan and Kardashian combined
Getting ready to eat some steak potatoes and salad can't wait finish watching my movie then to bed I go
The outfield should have dove to save the no hitter
That was French for: "Im the King of the World!"
RT : Pac 12 refs would have overturned that catch by Mario last night, it moved slightly.
Located right here in Lexington, out marketing guy can meet with you at our office!
Don't put off living to next week, next month, next year or next decade. The only time you�fre ever living is in this moment.
How about "pixie?"
It's a great night for some Rangers baseball!! :D
At first coffee was mainly drank by Arab Sufi monks, but by the 15th century it was being drank by everybody.
RT : Let the waters settle, you will see stars & moon mirrored in your being. ~Rumi
Wow I have some seriously bad ass talented followers that I have tremendous respect for #holla I sincerely appreciate it
You can't save searches inside the iPhone app?
hey darlin.. Is there a # for tech spprt at the view? Trying to upload a pic for the teeth makeover. Won't let me.
Thanks, Ryan. I emailed you. Let me know if you didn't get it.
no prob. good luck on the new beat!
Chris Getz is still a #royal. The last remaining link to Carlos Beltran.
if you were real you wouldnt be so happy about a highlight that happens every other day
A POP bitch, that's that shit I don't like!
O boy need more followers.
Going to be on the Sleeping With Sirens headliner tour for a week in March shooting a music video for a band called Conditions! Who's going?
Hahahaha! That sucks. :b
amen RT : I love long, romantic walks to........... the fridge
David west is an idiot
Today I caught myself smiling for no reason... then I realized I was thinking about you.
Lucy is not a puppy
RT : Visit us at Booth #1 to learn latest enhancements to , #cloud, & the Acquia Network.
What the world needs is more geniuses with humility, there are so few of us left....
OH: hopefully not with that lady...
don't remind me. Do we have a meeting?
RT contact me immediately to get 2 for $10, and $15 for VIP
The only place I want to be right now is sitting in the open-roofed Miller Park watching the #Brewers. Alas, I'm in a dorm room studying.
We have $60 do I hear $70? maybe could wear it :D RT I'll chip in a ten spot :)
there are sit ups involved in today's #WOD. I'm guessing that I will be feeling those 80 GHD sit ups I did last night. Oy!
yay!! raises are nice, and this one will help!!
You want a job on planet Earth? And all this time I thought you were here.
Iwanna see and
Thanks for a great and fun class.
WE WANT GREENBAY
you guys can viber me when i'm in Europe :3
thank goodness I'm not the only one lol. :D
Poor Coach! Hope your day gets better... and I am sipping on some Pikes Place... Thank God decided to sell K-cups
Putting off an easy thing makes it hard. Putting off a hard thing makes it impossible. -Charles E. Wilson
I'm pretty sure we're supposed to take that literally.
I am not entertaining your argument! Broke bread & time, now u wanna talk about yesterday?! Come on baby, #Smile & Enjoy The Moment!
Thanks! I saw the papers a couple days ago and enjoyed reading yours on crowdsourcing and deception detection.
not feeling well...
text message , no
Closed LONG $NZDUSD for +40 pips profit; 1% of the community volume is trading the NZDUSD with sentiment 64% SHORT
That's what I'm saying. The drama be slipping by on my ahh. Lol
Security tip 9. Guard your personal information 10. Don't assume privacy. Assume you are being tracked by someone.
iPhone announcement today! give me the play by play!
Pussy calling my name
what a great message. Just happy good stuff. Love it!
So, you're saying that your hair's getting less grey? For some reason I've lost more of mine in last year than ever before...
I need to start writing again. More than 140 characters at a time.
no i can't . just tell me
Awww that's actually on the day of my graduation! I'm sorry :( thanks though!
Gonna give up drinking for a while.
Wake and bake
Me and my love just got to Hawaii that was the longest flight ever..
congratulations on graduating this weekend!
I'm super sleepy! I want to take a nap for like 3 hours O_o
you are locked in. Enjoy the race.
Go to hell! RT : I wanna play the wegi board! ????
1. What Inspired You To Dance? 2 . What Do You Want To Be When You Grow Up? 3 . Celebrity Crush? 4. Favorite Type Of Music ? 1
Happy Birthday girl ( :
• follow us b #400 win surprize gift ! we buy gold silver coins articles of value !WATCH BATTERIES FROM $ 1.99 FREE LAYAWAY!GREAT DISCOUNTS
and some of the mobile only content seems to me to be some of the most interesting didactic content.
I stopped reading your rag pieces around week 2 of last yr.
I'll be in Boston on April 20th.. i'm excited to see what they do to..
Yvonna Russell thanks for the add
oh so pretty I feel pretty
i could never date someone with the same name as me.
I didn't know Rachel Berry's parents were actually two gay fathers! Awesome!
was going to watch Live at the Bike's WPT coverage while scanning papers...but LATB is down.
This week has been so beautifully busy...busy busy bees we've been!
No matter how "busy" a persons day might be. If they "really care", they'll always find time for you.
Happy Friday #SanDiego! Who is driving a #car2go this weekend? Where are you taking it? Let us know!
Aww shucks! Thanks for being you and all that you do!
Check out our GET FIT FOR KIDS CHARITY PROGRAM tomorrow morning on ABC 15 at 530 & 630!
I have never had Nutella
wait what is a noogie?
Initial surveys back from Post-Doc seminar we taught show Dreamweaver higher than Web apps. Greater ability to customize maybe why?
Yay!! My super awesome and incredibly wonderful Sister is now on Twitter! If you like me, you'll LOVE her. :)
HULK LIKE GAYS
Sorry, it was me...
Just enjoyed lunch with some great people
It goes down LIVE inside Club Empire TONIGHT at 9p on with , & ! Join us!
Awww thanks Andy, I'm flattened!
exactly how i am feeling today, just want to be at the yard
we will figure things out tonight “: Torn in between the 2! Ah.”
Huge congrats to my insanely talented friend, on the pick up of ABC's pilot #LastResort!! :) Can't wait to start watching!
Fell asleep at the computer. Wake up. Work. Repeat.
you're very welcome! I wouldn't have it any other way. You're a great person <3 love you!
“: man no disrespect but these dudes are super waaaack. i go on at 11:15, 30 mins before chip!!!” good shit my dude!
it's time to stand up and find out where you came from
yes we got it. I forward it to my business partner. That song is a hit bro!
Just some co-worker ? What going away pizza did you eat?
#sex lets have sex
What's up twitter followers how r u all doin today?!?
VT's Logan Spaw tallies first hit of the game for Hokies, but we're still scoreless thru 5 complete.
I should spend more time with my family
Omg. When people play with my hair > 😌
Big Bill Thompson welcomes Big Bill Daley back to the City of Big Shoulders. Why hang out with those little people in Washington anyway?
looking forward to coming back to L.A. in April!
follow us on , video release time will be tweeted soon!!! :)
Listening to Kristen Hersh
Not a big fan of church swag #banana shoes..
man u crazy for dat video keep up man first 50cent now dondria u da man
congrats love <3 now txt me back
Has your mechanic ever tried to sell you something you may not need, or used car tech lingo you don't understand?
RT Had a cup of coffee and read "Making Scholarly Publications Accessible" (cont…
A bunch from leaving on Tuesday to do 150 miles of the Camino de Santiago. My heroes!
Im on the moms side
seriously?! Do they keep stats for flopping?
RT : when you head out to the #colts game... please take a new or gently used coat to donate for
I just don't get it....
Yep. I'm done for the year. No throwing for me.
I will b accompanying G. Claiborne friday night in Los Angeles on piano @ El Camino college's Society of Music Concert.
pick me up in 20 outside the student center? My phone is out of battery
your welcome keep up the good work!!!!
Thank you for your patience!
Just once! But your project looks really extreme & cool also
That work out tonight tho was much needed
Got some great social media tips today from and Thanks for coming and giving some advice!
Great speed networking session at #insights12 #Epicor conference.
CNN wants and interview! I'm writing the info for the producer now. PRAY!
This faggot said his favorite team was Team USA cause he can't decide who he likes -__-
starting breaking bad from season 1 tonight.
#celticschat Are the Celtics gonna' make the playoffs? YES/NO tweet me :)
Its so dark!
Thank you for the mention!
Jätte bra, you little rascal, you! How did you know?
LOL!!! We def need to talk and catch up!!!!
DM me your number
WH notes in order to maintain openness of the #Internet some modicum of a uniform international regulatory scheme needed.
Oh nice! I made sure to archive my Geocities site so future researchers won't be without my insights into the X-Files.
I think thats an excellent idea! Many are repeat offenders, and the punishments are not nearly strict enough.
Walker talkin about 'millions of out of state special interest dollars.' Are people really gonna buy that line from the $25 million guy?
lol. That dudes a fucking psycho. It's not even funny anymore Chels. I'm scared.
seriously - we don't open till 530 please don't sneak in the back door and scare the crap out of me.
I can't log into my school email, after a stressful day of registration issues and confusion. Bad timing. Have I been kicked out of college?
I thought that Lamar Odom got a fair deal in Dallas. On the other hand, his non-Kardashian family problems didn't help.
oh well then I complement you on your choice and will power :)
With my mother hospital for her post surgery check up
Taking loads at a bookstore now.
Whitney Bezzant auditions for Live for Music
What you do after school is very important if you want a job in the future.
I don't wanna talk about it i'm sorry
really tough lately! Thanks for the encouragement! I really did need it! Thank you :-)
hello my TWEETS.. Drop me a line.. tell me hows..everyone doing.. have a great night... ciao ciao a presto...
Happy Easter everyone :) I have blue dye on my elbow and I think it might stay there forever ;P
I have no clue, I asked him and he's like don't be rude?
having an egg salad sandwich - do you like that? I put potato chips on mine LOL
Hm what should it be??? : You'll need a *safe word* u can both understand. ": How abt sex plz!
About to come out of hibernation.
It's extremely charitable of us to take on the entire Southern Hemisphere's fall/winter weather in one night.
some of y'all have a lot of free time on your hands!
yay you followed me! Thanks :D
TGIF! "Like" this status if you are happy that its Friday and you are ready to have a great weekend ;)
Looking for people for a short- term temp assignment. Please email or DM for details.
For the last week I've been thinking there is something wrong with my PHP script, come to find out today that it isn't me, it's the server.
Man need to turn this thang up.
Hoping big dinner will get her started, will keep you posted!
#MittRomneyFilms Lie Hard With A Vengeance
Tired of seeing parents giving their #IPads #IPods to infants & toddlers instead of interacting w/them.There ISN'T an app for that.
haha deleted the account a year ago. I hate facebook
your making me so hungry. Free? and I may have to come. When do u work this week
hey--have you seen anvil the story of anvil? Thoughts?
I love you all very much! I got my account back to me, which is awesome!
Yes, sir. Warren Zevon RIP. You are still missed.
": You can't mess with a Child of God."
feels good doesnt it?!
What's the female equivalent of a mustache? Something that could make each and every one of us look beyond creepy? Probably a mustache.
Congrats to !! What an awesome day for her getting a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame!!
you need to get better soon man, we need you on the field bro!
"A day without sex is a day wasted man!" Judging from his awkward pantomime, he has wasted his whole life.
Even when I know platform well, am always amazed at students discovering alternative/easier ways to do stuff!
not usually but I could..
Cotton Candy Brings back alot of my childhood memories&its so yummy:))
good question, it's hard to explain....just a feeling.
omg you are back on Twitter. You crazy bitch. Coming in for goat cheese crepe ASAP. Still on for Center Sunday????
We come to love not by finding a perfect person, but by learning to see an imperfect person perfectly. ~ Sam Keen
Kids have awareness of global world but know less about the community around them.
He probably choked on his own bile.
haha, you silly.
STTTOOPP! MOST DEPRESSING THING I'VE EVER HEARD!
What was your favorite Tv show as a kid?<3
Just because I say I'm a dancer, DOES NOT mean I am a stripper.my Goodeness
Goodnight moon
Shoot. Shoulda checked twitter before I got here. How late are you working tonight?
cheap vodka crans should make for a fun evening ;)
Headbands with bows are here to stay they have transended fad and moved to be a staple.
Thanks, checking you out now.
lol he need to get up and you know why you didn't get me
Waiting on the world to change ..
You must be Windows 95 because you gots me so unstable.
I actually get to watch in Chicago today on
Visit www.allegrodancecompany.net and see our exciting new changes!
There should be a handful dBridge and Instru:mental releases on there. There's also a couple Nu:tone albums you might like
Lol are you gonna start charging?!?
chilling u??
That was such a tough lost...and on our HOMECOMING!!
#TeamTexans everyone but Shannon Sharpe picked beangals Shannon picked our boys
No, that's the truth RT : The Yankees are a good baseball team
I wanted to be a comedian everyone laughed I just gave up
Speaking for Cindy, our argument is not that players can't have pride, but they shouldn't just run off so quickly.
Hey stranger! It's been ages! Hope all is well in your world and that the words and the wine are aflowin'!
lol isn't that the reason why you dont
Email address sent to your email.
Classes are so boring...
I take 3 L's to the head love, live, life then I'm dead!
i did now follow back!
I've been absolutely terrified every moment of my life & I've never let it keep me from doing a single thing I wanted to do. ~Georgia...
The Park police are evicting the #occupyDC folk in McPherson Square! Sad scene on my way to church
Hm.. What should I cook?
Its hard to find a girl that has a Play station 3 and no kids.
AnyTime Ms. Lovely ;)
My favorite F Word: #Feminist (and damn proud of it!)
if it makes you feel better I'll be that...I'll stay QUIET about this cause it's making you QUITE upset LOL
tumblr goes down. sign on to twitter and complain about it
Watching kickoff to #F1GrandPrix season on #SPEED from Melbourne. Hamilton & Button look good but Vettel & Hamilton lurk. McLaren Merce ...
lol! hell is wrong with us?
Ghost Protocol in IMAX was incredible. Brad Bird and JJ Abrams just seem to get it. Josh Holloway! Absurd gadgets! Continuity! Cameos!
burnin out this fuse up here alone
Plus Kayne West AND Foster The People are playing at the #BDO2012. book us in.
M I love Jamaican food OMG
#printchat RT : Do pre-press operators ever tell off-color jokes?
Destiny is calling me to open up my eager eyes..
Pulling out the banjo for a service...look out!
Playoffs later today ! Can't sleep so excited.....
being perfect would be boring
Stop our Beachside Café at the Tradeshow opening tomorrow at the Convention Center #1110-4 for party wristband, coffee, freebies
thanks dude! Really glad you enjoyed the songs!
maybe...... Maybe not haha =D
You should really try to collect those clips from the projects you have worked on. If that's not possible keep working for clips
I would wish you luck but I'm saving all the good luck for myself lol.
what's changed?
LOL! LOve you.
I had 15 people against me and two on my side. You know how that feels.
Omg omg omg Im almost done with school! 9 days till graduation :)
Your toddler shall one day rule this land. //
I was planning on winning the lottery a few weeks back. Boom: Cadorin Arena
“: A drunk person's actions is just a sober person's thoughts.” Not always, otherwise all grenades would be virgins still.
hey, Bri. Thanks for following.
Hmm words are so fun. BHO Loves Twisting emotional phrases with crap but it is still crap
#cottonbowl Let's see if we can see some defense in a bowl game for chrissakes!
Yes we are in the same timezone! Happy Mother's Day mama!
Thanks buddy, you did a great job breaking down PPC today
Thanks for the RT!! :)
Whitney thank you for the gift that you gave to the world,thank you for inspiring such a beautiful and touching service.
my little sister moves into #ClarkU today! I hope her #weekone is as memorable as mine was 5 years ago ah!
Headed to next....such a euphoric day :)
Lots of concurrent processing. Why I'm having to use a large high speed FPGA and a processor.
business is not what it used to be - the well-being of social, cultural systems is critical to future of business success
At the Tigers game!
RT : Please, please I hope you are designing a special badge for the by on Oct 30, National Mall, DC!
my 11:11 wish hasn't come true yet... When is it supposed to start working?..
We're hiring #USC students for the summer (and 2012-13). Video editor, admin., comm. asst., researchers! DM or .
Refilled my South Cider growler at tonight. Always happy to see the place packed!
Thanks for making our entire office laugh.
Catholic Churches Distribute Letter Opposing Obama Healthcare Rule
Come on lakers
Wow, that unwatched pot just boiled pretty darn quickly.
wow that was messed up you better not tell him you know... poor dude
so, so, so pumped for grabbing some to enjoy en route to NYC later today!
I heard it through the grapevine... #SpeakingOfFebruary4th is going to be super groovy!
Holdengraber says that he does cognitive theater! And after any LIVE program, people should *read* afterward most of all.
I think I really like who I'm becoming
I'm being ironic, there is a big debate over raising height limits in dc and some people think raising them will destroy the city
I'm craving Easter candy. Wtf, Mary!
One of our Entrepreneurship 101 students, incarcerated at a MA state prison, has asked to DELAY her release date to finish the course!
I've been there, done it, fucked around, after all that this is what I found...nobody wants to be alone. If you're touched....shit.
Academia: An extended playground where socially inept adults try to convince themselves of their own intelligence and worth.
Happy Fat Tuesday! Let's use the day as an excuse to stuff our greedy little mouths with as many forbidden treats as we can. Donut, anyone?
Thanks. I wonder about DirectTV or Prism. And are there any other alternatives here?
hell yea! Lol
what what??
Thanks Nova.
looking for a link, code to the webinar on Thursday.
yes.. How is school in Iran??
It was totally weird! I kept wondering if he didn't realize what he was doing, but in hindsight, HE TOTALLY DID.
He wants the milk and pearl necklace for free.
what's wrong with my meggie!
We're not that scary, are we? ;) Pass it along, I'm sure someone will be interested!
I want a gf
The Union is holding a #MemorialUnion Design Meeting this coming Tuesday Nov. 1st at 6:00 pm to forge ahead with the #GlassBox PLEASE ATTEND
Business chimes in supporting expansion.
Haha..does that mean you rested up & drank lots of OJ?!
I like Jamie too! Seems very sweet!
Does anyone know any good fit classes in NYC that offer battling rope workout? I have an editor who is dying to try it! ?
Probably a pretty good idea, since the cuts would take place in January. Um, three months away.
Thanks for being on the blogging panel today at #SPJR9. It was great to have your perspective on the session.
Funny stuff tonight. Sunday Team 7PM show. Bueno.
6 After Seth lived 105 years, he fathered Enos;
"This ring is SPECTACULAR! Beautifully clear stone, quick shipping. A+" - Ann from Clearwater, Florida
Getting Ready For The Main Event. May This Year Be The Year! 2012 WSOP CHAMPIONSHIP like the sound of it...
What if they got married...
Oh, that's where you went, too? Thanks- we were excited about the feature :)
NFL Head,Neck&Spine Committee Dr who cleared Chris Owusu stated Chris "is not at increased risk for subsequent concussions"
Besides forgetting the words , he did a good job
dad if you wanna go get some strawberry cream cheese and bring change for a 20 and lrg ice coffee nilla c/s, THANKYOU dont be late
I'll start tomorrow
darn. Well I'd you can, maybe you should go at ten if you think that's ok!
I dont think its a bad thing at all! And dont be scared to ask that!
rest of the season and playoffs. easy.
I saw my nephew today for the first time in months that Lil guy made my day!
It's not all about waiting until the storm passes, it's about learning to dance in the midst of it ...
It's where the future $$ at and you can't beat the lifestyle. Surf, sand, and all the beautiful locations!
"Together we are weight. I am/mass multiplied by you:/gravity. We invent our own inertia"- from W=MG by #amreading her chapbook
When I see ppl with muscles I get motivated to workout for a good minute... Then I want a Mcflurry! :)
sometimes I like to walk by the sea ... it relaxes me ... ;)
#ThingsIReallyCantStand Haters!! Get another hobby please.
Father John Misty Magic Wands
If my head comes in contact with sunlight for even a split second, I start to feel a burnin sensation. #whosgotsunscreen?
So I am on the runway in Charlotte, unable to watch the UK game with a bunch of Louisville nerd students. Help!
Some lions mate over 50 times a day. #odd facts
Homework is a bitch I'm 100% gonna be up all night
THIS is why the bunt is fucking stupid
Cincinnati is a beautiful, complicated city with many tasty layers. I wouldn't wanna be anywhere else
Glad to see Blackberry is investing in some advertising... Only four years too late.
Gets accomplished, period.
thanks, will definitely miss you too :(
We will be open at 11 for Texas Oklahoma Saturday!
Imagine, Create, Manifest!!!!! The Time is Now
it's some ghetto lil girls living in my neighborhood. They was tryna fight over a nigga at 4 this morning.
I'll do it in like 20 :)
Lets roll
You can TELL the president's nervous. He KNOWS this could be big...
Thanks Jess! RT If you are interested in architecture and/or design, I highly recommend following Beautiful work.
It's "Thirsty Thursday"...We're showin love... --- $5 Goose (All Flavors) -----$5 Hennessy VS Until 11 PM...
Thanks for spreading the tree love!
Man, went to sleep during the 4th quarter and woke up to news that the got eliminated!
Been at the doctor for an hour now waiting on my mom. I'm ready to get in my bed.
and today I wanted too go
idk how I'm feeling actually lol! How you maam?
Hey man! hope you feel better
bartending come in for some great drinks and specials!
#9 "My eyes are taking a break."
Happy Birthday Dr King
We have more than one collection with dance cards. This one was blank- we hope it was an extra and not from a wallflower!
for once in your life...
And I will mock all of you & spit on all of you & flog you & kill u & in 3 days, you will lie. Joey 4:20 Happy Easter
I don't think so. I lost many brain cells there ;)
#butyougotdemjsdoe #htine Don't catch ammonia chile.
OR it could be Brad Pitt a la Burn After Reading. (Try not to kill him)
Didn't want to post it but it's too funny not too. Got back from the gym, sat in my chair, 2 wheels broke, then while fixing my pants ripped
Until next time buddy, I will miss you<3
that dude looks like he could make a diamond in that fist, what are you putting in the coffee there?
Just fell up my bedroom steps twice running to get mr softee & I miss em hahaha
#4famouswords What is your problem?
Gratitude ditto. :) May your Monday be better.
If you havent seen the post game conference for the Xavier vs. Cincinnati game, please watch
If I saw a chick leave her purse I would just assume she don't want that shit.
Election season is upon us, they are already running political ads on the internet.
MySpace was just mentioned on Viewpoints as social media that is currently in use...um ax MySpace and add Twitter to that conversation.
God's plans for us is always better than what we have planned,RT if you trust in God and would never disagree with what may happen to us...!
park forest IL it's n country club hills I won't kno the name of the place and what time it start until I get my tix next week
Mondays, Tuesdays, or Wednesdays *1st cut FREE - before 3pm. We'll do up to 2 free cuts per day. Call Raymond. expires 12/31/11.
My favorite Feruzza line ever was when he wrote that calling Granite City a brewery was like calling Subway a bakery.
In Kenmare, Ireland pub - guess what is on telly? Rugby.. No Hurling.. No. Golf in Arizona where I live
have you fake called the Easter bunny yet?
Honored to be among such great people!
i think you are so incredible you are always by my side through good and bad thankyou!
I am looking for additional partners and customers to meet with in Minnesota next week. Please le me know if you are interested.
we also got you guys on Reverbnation!
What a cloudy #Sabbath day. Still in all God is good!
follow before she commits!26
I am guessing its not a good thing that I am falling asleep on my couch, but I have boot camp in twenty minutes.:)
I should of gotten someone to get me chocolate strawberries, hahaha.
My pleasure. Someone very fortunate will receive that internship.
i definitely will!!!
Gladly (I just did). Keep up the good work.
Guess that's RHE ONLY way she know how to get money!
Woah this is the shortest my hair has been in awhile.... #damnit 😠
Err, what time Game 7 will be?
Great work, Josh!
Stepped outside to enjoy some of this glorious day!
Please follow me <3 ?
Thanks for the consistent updates!
I call Gatorade by the color instead of the flavor
doesnt matter it never gonna come out.
"Dear Justin, if you were my Boyfriend your Jerry would never be alone." Pregnant Because Of Jerry ;)
if I could have a job to where I could make everyone I knew happy, I'm pretty sure the world would be a great place (:
Passing through Kingsburg, CA where is from. Go vols!
Treat Yo Self day is a success so far. Dropped a hundo on clothes and camp gear. Haircut next!
k thx u can change it if u don't like it -MB
12 hours bruh. Midnight release FTW.
Thanks for the follow
To tell you the truth, prolly wouldn't think about that. I can tell you I have never worn one out on a shoot.
I hope everyone had a happy Mole Day! And wore their safety goggles!
getting a message that the server www3.isrl.illinois.edu/unsworth cant' be found
Katie why did you day suck?
RT : Spread the word -- our next #MKEfoodies event will be held at Rumpus Room. Details are forthcoming! Hope to see you there!
yeah! Meeting at knight foundtn booth now. Deciding food location.
#FollowAnyTime thanks for following! Huge fans of your work!
T-minus 12 minutes for prayer meeting. cant' wait to see God show up! God bless you! join in if you like my Skype name is Carlos.Bello507
What's a good phone number to reach you on???
Thanks for the advice, , , , & I had a great first day :)
Canadian mixed with a little Caribbean right?
how soon is now?
One if the best center fielders of all time is now in right field for the Angels. you're still the man!
I HOPE U NOTICE ME I BEEN WISHING THIS DAY 2 COME TRUE 4 3 YEARS!plz follow me
Jets Defense lookin real nice...quick moves and gang tackles like my BROs old Maryvale team.....Lookin Good Lookin Mean...
I think Hu Jintao just rolled up across the street from my apartment. There's fanfare, flag waving and protesting a plenty. Sirens, too.
Rocking a #punk #Audrey Hepburn look today
I agree. And I love his pinkie rings! Hi Big Boy!
End of Day 4 in the Sony Service Watch and still no call to schedule a service call. We'll see what day % in-store tomorrow. Just Terrible
Deal....no question, great trade
it is not a real siren unless it is a #Drudge SIREN
A.C.E? Real hipsters use CE.
I would actually like to meet a heat fan, someone who isn't from miami tho. I don't think they exist
Charlotte: Wheres a good place to watch the fight tonight?
for real?
Yes !!!!! I LOVE IT. YOU LOOK FUCKING FLAWLESS!!!!
That sound you hear? It's the institution of marriage banging its head against the wall asking for mercy.
Let's do it!!! Idk if hookah will be open tonight though but we will see!
In a network, you avoid duplicating your efforts to focus on what you’re good at.
why?? You co-own this account haha
Adoption of SharePoint is slow. need to show the benefits and get buy in.
You mess with me and mess with her I'll make sure you get what you deserve
Why do I feel like everyone knows what's best for me except me?
yes just checked mine to make sure it recorded!
*MY* ACLs are fine. Our dog Max however, has a torn one. Ugh.
Thanks for the follow. Cool website. great services.
please follow our co-founder !
hi slut
great meeting you at the event. Keep in touch, lots of ways to collaborate.
lmfao boi its a drink i make
Noke bound with !
is there a better kind?
Do NOT miss Uncle Vanya at ! Very moving production/cast!
Delta Air Lines named "Top Tech-Friendly U.S. Airline" by PCWorld for airport recharging stations, in-flight Wi-Fi and smartphone apps.
Bamboos grow +3 ft a day and can reach the full height in a few days. That's an enviously short puberty period!
Hey buddy, are you down for shuffle board, at the super bowl party?! if you need a partner, we'll figure that out there!
What is there to do in #DC? Going there tomorrow for the first time in ten years
That's because we are too ill for you Minnesotans!
no, did u?? What happened?
That awkward run you do when a car lets you cross the street.”
Food for Thought Thursday! Eat oranges and stay young! Oranges are high in antioxidants, which neutralize the effects of free radicals,...
Gas is now $3.84 per gal. for me. #Obama #DrillHereDrillNow Was this the #Change I was promised? Can I change it back? 4 years will do.
You'd need wifi or internet. Don't judge me :-)
justin b birthday is coming
bar stays green!
Thank you Kevin for the great tweet! Have a beautiful day!
Come on k rod. And to kotsay of all people.
Dually RT : Noted. RT : Farting isn't weird. Injecting yourself with bull semen: that's weird.
Home Depot.
u might not love me but i still luv u and i will support u in any thing a 100% :(
my bladder is goin to explode!
Please follow me :) please please please
Really did a great job in Bmore MD at Ramshead. I need Info for your cd, your leggins, & your shoes! :)
#HEADDESK. Can you define socialism for me??
why was LeChoke standing in the corner as usual? Where was the #MVP?
Thanks man. Got the link to your stuff in there now too!
Dr. Freeze: Treating rare diseases requires interactions of scientists, doctors, patients, government, philanthropists &more
we'll be sure to tell her!
Let me know when things settle down so Cooper can meet Uncle Bav
Here we go! #Damagedgoods starts today!!
hi say Happy Mothers Day to your mom from me...(in Mexico is today):-)
Locker room scenes galore. Enjoy!
Twitter has truly changed the world....
Finally starting #DowntonAbbey. There's no way it can live up to the hype. Then again, that's what I said about
The resurrection of JC Penny is upon us. All hail Ron Johnson!
cool! Ill be here from 12-2p, come see me before u go to ur picnic;)
Hello everyone ! Today is birthday and remember birthday is the 2 so keep that in mind !! Merry Thursday !
wait what? O.O who?
wow that's cool going to the draft !!!
RT: This Thursday of will be our guest on #mediachat. The fun starts Thurs. night at 10pm EST. See ya there!
I live next to an amazing golf course! It's great for anything except golf.
you are the best psychologist!!! Listening to you guys this morning... Miss you
A girl who believes in fairy tales...
A bad day fishin beats a good day workin
you like them too?:))
I wish I could, but I have class tonight
You are very welcome.
There's no greater bliss in life than when the plumber eventually comes 2 unblock ur drains. No writer can give that sort of pleasure
Cake for breakfast, lunch and snack..taking treat yourself to a whole new level. Thanks so much
“: writes YA books. Start with "Uglies." I read tons of YA cuz so many good authors!!
I ask ours every morning if he had good puppy dreams. Good stuff. RT : There's puppy dreams going on on my couch.
RT Doubt, of whatever kind, can be ended by action alone. Thomas Carlyle 1795-1881, Philosopher and Author
Took a shot and chased with pickle juice
I CANNOT believe it---time truly flies.
S/o to for joining the pata sucia club (;
if you order from Amazon often, yes.
The people who can ignore the current economic situation and want to have a stock price run-up are in fat city today.
Thx! Second clip soon!
"A man never shows his own character so plainly as by his manner of portraying another's."
Providence improv fest! Who else is going?
“: Ever look at your best friend and wonder why the hell you aren't comedians?”
Needs someone to play in my hair till I doze off.
Fair enough...!
Love it! -> RT : A smile is the lightening system of the face, the cooling system of the head & the heating system of the heart
Observing w/unsurprised bemusement as another higher ed institution and its depts gate-keep and turf-protect themselves into irrelevance.
Accidentally sent an email to someone I hate. Recall, recall. This morning is not going well. Ug.
I don't understand why people skip class. You're just going to have to mkae it up later.
Time to start booking some shows on this Monday morning!
whats good? i got something for you! dm me your email!
Seeing "God of Carnage"
Join Co- Author of "Success On God's Terms" in Atlanta this week "#Take Back Your Life Tour" do not miss this life changing event!
When someone has a nickname, calling them by their real name doesn't sound right.
And there you have it. NYR in 7. I actually called one right. Go me!
hey wadown girl havent seen u since since myspace died lol you got a facebook how you been ;-)
12/3 706 S. 5th MKE - We will be creating tech to make planning for bike infrastructure better. Share lunch & wisdom with us 12:30P
Honored. Thanks! Or thanks again ( #sleepless memory loss)!
some shit aint gone never change....
hosting the ladies free all night special with free drinks tonight ladies get here only after hour spo on a friday night
Jus set in that i cant jus go to florida when ever i wanna now.....
can't wait for
45% of small companies on Facebook & Twitter (more than have a company website)
nothing wrong with that and lord knows there's enough of them down southside lol
Special Valentines Menu avail today thru Mon. We are open this Sunday 11:00-3:00, Come early for best selection or call ahead.
“: why arent i in a band?” Same
yeah that was a def work out lol at least someone got some sleep for us :)) I'm so glad you came :))
RIP #Junior Seau. The only linebacker to have his own Kellogg's cereal poster, trapper keeper folder, and SNES video game...
SATURDAY Small Tempest, The Light Clear Conscience, Thin of the Meadow, Hills Like Hemingway $14
Feels good to be back.
Cool! This year I started with 5 different cups (pennies, nickels, dimes, quarters, singles) but now coins are all together.
Going on now: Wellesley Symposium on Liberal Arts Learning in the Digital Age: Interdisciplinary Science. Follow along at
When you come from a life of not having to having too quickly that's where the problem comes into play.
damn right i gets the paper or bread or cash w/e ppl say now a days
Making the every day location feel precious, dreamy, stunning, quiet and extraordinary is Mike Pedersen's photography: mikiep.com
Truth-> : Which? Everything is great b/c they win w/o Derrick? Or this means nothing b/c Derrick isn't playing?
#MerryChristmas and a
that makes 2 of us
the lake is almost back to 70F but with that comes the algae growth.
": Why is Lebron's hairline so far back on his head?"his dam head bands in the way lol
Doc appt for 145, still waiting. Makes sense
looks good...don't know when I'm leaving on sat, but will attend if I can...
Honestly that shit ruined my day and then was on my mind the rest of it. way to ruin a chill bro day
hacked indeed! Thanks for the heads-up!
For those following the World Series, what was your reaction to Canada beating USA for the PanAmerican Championship? Were you even aware?
"I don't wanna be the best QB in the NFL. I wanna be one of the best MEN to play for the NFL." MARRY ME RIGHT NOW AARON RODGERS 😍😘💏💑💋💍
If doesn't fire Spaz Flynn Fund donors are going to flee by the masses.
Woke up an hour ago, laid in bed thinking about work.... My alarm is going off in 10 min. I may as well start my day.
its not too bad, i am sure NC is full of cigar treasures. :)
New Twitter chat on PR Mobile starts this Thursday, 5 pm PST - #prmobile with and
OMG are you tweeting now??
not looking so good though. Have them going all the way
Just letting you all know, I'm always willing to talk and make friends :D I dont bite. haha.
Weird dreams>>>
#dml2012 Learning about muppet themed scavenger hunt designed to orient college students to N. Carolina St U (Raleigh) library. Cool stuff!
me to RT I want a septum piercing.. A small one
Dont get mad at me...
hahaha he aint cute at all.
RT : Long but fun day. Feeling' tired and sticky. Shower and bed for this chica. #g2b12 <--- me too! Early morning tomorrow…
Friends of the Library Used Book Sale @ Takoma Park DC Library! Sat. May 5 from 10-4 on the lawn. 416 Cedar St NW
sounds like we need a debate whenever/wherever Sherri wants.
One of C. Simmons favorite topics.
nice tan em
Put me in coach I'm ready to play! Get into the Game of Life!
CLU-IN | In the News &gt; Federal Business Opportunities (FedBizOpps)
Who is Prankster that can teach me thier ways? ;)
Playing DALLAS today @ 5pm w/ Motion City Soundtrack, The Early November, Hellogoodbye & more!
Describing an iPod to a 4-year-old as being "like a Walkman" is not helpful to them.
yeah. Like there are so many more important things the lgbtq community has to worry about but this sucks.
kk yes! Hopefully it's snow free!
RT : Volunteering at Nashville's Project Homeless Connect all day today :-)
it's so sad how much people change..
not sure I can do justice to this at all, let alone in tweet form..
Great looking guy! ;)
Smell that? It's genius brewing...
Finishing our volunteer recognition list for tonight's program. SO thankful for all our volunteers!
:/ have a good day.
Bad season premier of Glee...
Now I'm having a real hard time finding anything good on TV. First world problems.
Sorry, Jorge. I LOVE when Duke loses! I hate corporate colleges. Long live the one percent!
exactly and im jus doing me and focusing on my shyt and like u said wateva happens happens aha
Y'all know I'm on board that plan.
thanx for the follow
Can you please help me? My birthday is on the 20th and I really want to wish me a happy birthday since his EP comes out!
I can't reply to your DM's if you aren't following me! But, to answer your questions: Sure...what's up?
I <3 U and so do my kids. they are special needs children and cant talk much but they always say MJ! God bless
as long as I've got her, nothing'll get me down
and I live in a tree with a bunch of elves!
That awkward moment when nobody likes your facebook status.... :/
Hey What's new in world ? I like the university 'ceo' strategy.
Ever watch #glee? That's kind of like my work social life.
50/50 was overall disappointing. Levitt was pretty good, but just not a good film imo. Drawn out, inconsistent writing, bad directing
- I heard that new Pho Barclay movie is pretty epic..
Niggas take me as a joke ; Ill cut you like its funny :*
At the mayoral candidate forum - New Shiloh
I bet you do (;
1 more week of school
Why is NY always destroyed in movies?! 🗽✈❤
Rockn it here at the loft with wonfu from Taewon
Goldfish s'mores are delicious.
From the Chuck E. Cheese show: What music do balloons hate? Pop music!
That's ludicrous. Kobe can't given his teammates heart. That's on them. He's playing with the flu.
": ": s/o to nf" Following back!"awready
Please come over soon <3
Chris Kaman is the best redneck i have ever watched play this game, he is pretty damn good! any team could use him.
Aren't you tired of society ?! Lol
with the chocolate....OHMYSWEETCHOCOLATELORD. im hungry.
Mad tired and bored probably hitting the bed early to night
Just 10 days left to see Middleman's City Limits & Regaining Our Faculties. Stop by before they close!
Vest: We need to simultaneously compete & cooperate globally; should be driven by sharing
Ladies and Gents! We have received tons of submissions for the allCanes model search! Thank you so much for participating! We will be...
Last day in Switzerland- 50/rain- looking forward to the Nyc sun!!!
Me fail English? That's unpossible. - Ralph (The Simpsons)
RT those prices are extra crazy for
not much watching that star wars 3D tonight and going into the office tomorrow. Is that exhibit open on the weekends?
The day follows me is the day I learn how to do a backflip...
Im Rite Here Sis
there was a bad wreck at the entrance to campus...and therefore we lost all power!
Wouldn't having the leash make it so that it couldn't run off...? #youmakenosense ;)
The Heat seem so much bigger than all the rest.
Head injury?
Emailed you! =)
Out to eat with my King!!!❤
I can just go to a pet store and walk by the gold fish a bunch. maybe.
"dude i think your babe just barked."
tumblr, you just made stupid hoe blast through my house and not turn off. brb my ears are bleeding.
amen to that!
Returned from Sacramento and a meeting with the CDRC. Great progress and additional support for
Just finished watching the PBS program- "The Buddha." His last words to the disciples who followed him- "Strive on- tirelessly."
I'm really excited for the future music I put out...
They should re-name the History channel , the Hitler channel! They have more shit on there about hitler than a little bit..
I don't want to see that kid too.
awesome! I would name mine Rocky!
I can hear the excuse already. "oh, um I couldn't watch firefly b/c I had this UX Meetup thing to go to." :) haha
I'm glad you're homee❤
It's never too late to become what you might have been. -George Elliot
You are a cinema. I could watch you forever.
Can't wait to see you, neighbor!
Clean woulda stabbed myself in the eye with one them flags they wavin...
Who Tf Cakes With NOthing To Talk about
3rd generation military family, so they're in favor. Dad's an NCO, so I'm sure he doesn't want son on the "other side"
Thank you East Coast peeps for ruining The Voice for us.
#OccupyBurque Facebook says UNM granted a permit to stay on campus 24/7--if they move by Monday to Yale Park to spare Tight Grove.
We own the Giants
yes, apparently when men watch their calorie intake they still need a few calories for it not to count as a girlie diet drink
Embree had all the seniors at the press conference....hard to get good answers to questions...the frat house mentality kicks in
Many thanks for all the work on Scrubs. One of very few shows that has affected me on a personal level. Can't thank you enough!
If you find it in your heart to care for somebody else, you will have succeeded. ~Maya Angelou
Having tea with Sue the Tyrannosaur on a grey Chicago afternoon.
They haven't had a good crazy gimmick in a while. Always reminds me of the "attitude era" which was full of off the wall gimmicks.
“: My inner Sherlock Holmes is coming out.” everyday babygirl (:
u did it peace i am worried
Right on! RT : We are all apprentices in a craft where no one ever becomes a master. Ernest Hemingway
Quite appreciative of checking the new site and applauding it :) Thanks.
really enjoyed playing upstairs on Saturday. hope to see you soon
when people you dislike appear on your TL<<<<
I wish Sweden had a Half.com
RT : Follow sports editor for live tweets from day two of the CAA Men's Basketball Tournament in Richmond, Va.
it'll ply let my rt once
RT MT sharon cornu, 's deputy mayor, has resigned. #oo in statement, mayor says: "I’m grateful for her contributions."
When I win the lottery Indra!
Thanks for the great company Thanksgiving lunch! I'm thankful for the opportunity to work with such nice peeps.
The CASHER will be releasing 5 LOCKS to win tonight at 4:30 pm.. Stay tuned
my life who was cursed after he was rude to you m :/
There are no freely usable Matt images on Commons or Flickr Commons. So will need one from Matt to fix.
well i would give up my foot i need the internet
just ona those days tootse...just one of those days. ;) miss ya
Traditional Pennsylvania potato candy sold like crazy, so we made more. Looks like little spuds, but made of coconut cream. Ya gotta see.
touche but I believe u can keep commandment if you tweet to different # or highlight aspect to followers
Oh darn, that sucks! I just don't know if I can make it there since I'm going 2 LA & Boston is right after Dragon Con in ATL!
Brzezinski: We should not demonize China, not inject ourselves in East problms but advise, mediate, manipulate like UK in 20th Cent
Never underestimate appropriate perspective.
Indian-spiced pork in Martin Premoli's honor! Japan next.
You're young until you're not, you love until you don't,you try until you can't.
Know your enemy. ;)
Wish I was there. The work of which dreams are made ;)
i love you too
“: Man BIG UPZ to the radio stations playing my songs, the Program Directors thanks!" Now plz tell ur psycho fans to leave us alone
..and Roger Boisjoly, a NASA contractor who repeatedly voiced concerns about space shuttle Challenger before it exploded,died. He was 73.
Got a choir concert tomorrow, can't wait!
OMIGOSH! My heart hasn't raced this much since I got my first boner in class
I wish I was more ambitious 😓
GOP coalescing?
tinychatting with my sixth grade friends
Huge turnover.
John Legend "Tonight" >>>>> <3 This Song
aw yea ?.......what u been workin on
need to make a move before the trade deadline today!!! Get ur ass up Jim Buss!
Grrrr. A friend has extra tickets to beer under glass and, of course, I have to work.
Last episode of lost.... Not going to know what to do with myself
Great day training a new group of future camp counselors for #SummerCamp 2012. We can't wait for this upcoming summer.
alright - who goes home?
Interesting Supreme Court debate on health care -- it sounds like sanity is prevailing so far (ie in favor of ObamaCare)
'Abdu'l-Bahá’s train is in Ohio, heading for Toledo. Only 3.5 hours left until Cleveland.
That and cat herding really are my strong suits.
before, we hope! ;-)
hey!!!!haw r u ? i'm good. can you follow me ? u r my idol forever jasminator i love u jasmine follow me please thk :)
RT : Good luck to my lovely girlfriend for her exam today!!
Good! I'll hit you up soon
Student says WiFi in Copley was a "#gamechanger". See more reactions on our blog
the scripts new song nothing is the shit. and thats all i have to say.
A new year kiss from ? How did this girl get so lucky??!
jelly beans (:
thanks brother let the music ROCK...........
Dance practice after school :-/ dnt want to
Hey folks. Just reminding you to check out our single I.D.entity when you get the chance :) facebook.com/AMFADband
I'm annoyed. You're annoying.
Tip of the day: if you dont want to be where you are then maube you should start traveling
Headed to work on some home improvements in Takoma DC with :) #St.Columba's
Starting a monthly Colorado Circus World E-Newsletter. Email to subscribe or submit pics, events, stories, ect.
In the words of "Florida is a big place for a little guy." Referring to
if you #standwithwalker you stand for the deepest education cuts in our state's history and the worst in the nation last year
Show me a man who is a good loser and I'll show you a man who is playing golf with his boss.-- Jim Murray
The Children's Story by James Clavell
dunno. They were watering with a long hose, so maybe not. Definitely watering by hand earlier
I finally gave away my second #desk. Now, if only a #sewing table would fall out of the sky and info my apartment.
We're offering Velashape for those interested in looking slimmer minus the surgery. Call us to find out more.
"i had to mute my phone from lullz" being a 20 something on client calls at a media agency is really, really hard. Thanks, internet.
Bobby Valentine kinda looks like that wicked tanned lady who go arrested for bringing her kid to the tanning salon.
Sony... Nice.
Good for you! More than I've ever run.
WHEN YOU PRAY AND HEAR GODS VOICE YOU KNOW ITS REAL THANKS GOD
You're a sweetheart [:
My mom just told me to become a prostitute so I can have more money.
you r not giving people ur number!
shit let me have the ones my age ....
Great to see you involved Mike. Proud of you.
RT : on 6:40 am to chat about thousands of riders gearing up in support of Lung Association
Hahaha too funny.
Great, we need all the help we can get!
Talked to my grandma. She's worried about me getting hurt in NYC, the big city. I responded with, "Grandma. You live in Jerusalem."
You can do anything or nothing with a best friend and have the best time of your life!
Lucky David, mine has been shopping for three days said she'll be back when combines over.
"My genius is no more than a girl...if she agrees to play with me with her shirt off we will construct an Ilyiad." Ezra Pound, obviously.
Thanks for your support and mention~ we appreciate your sponsorship of !!
Really? Are you busy on Wed. night?
hey, FUCK YOU feelings!.
i hate that i live so far now :l
~arrives red-faced & panting~ Whew! Good workout. So, does that make up for 10 days of slacking? How about the ice cream? Cookies? #iwish!
Really Trump? You, Palin and the rest of the Birthers need to slapped Moonstruck style!!! Snap out of it!
Looking for link that works. Do you know which shelter or name of town? May be able to help.
However, thinking is taking over my storage capacity for this information.
On my way to the
God gave us power and dominion over everything on Earth, so that means we shouldnt live defeated lives.
#ExpertVisibilityTip: Repurpose your content. Turn a blog post into a video, an audio, etc. It's okay & it reaches different audiences.
tonight w crooked . Gonna be intense as always
How can you be when there can be only one?
Very impressive! Amnesty International is a great human rights organization!
omfg, and she makes it even more awkward than it already is.
because of everything for everyone, i feel like such a bad person.
No! I've liked the Rangers as a back-up team since the 90s when the 'Guins were effectively their farm team lol.
I'm on International Block x).
OMG CREEPY!
BTW, Chicago has now started (again) posting pictures of people arrested for solicitation and patronizing. know why?
Married to a brilliant wonderful man!!
im going to sleep now so hmu at 7:30
Also, had a good convo with Evo Institute 's Jerry Lieberman RE: community organization the right way (i.e., where it does good not harm!)
No, But I Love You Too, More Than You Will Ever Know(: <3 So You Should Follow Me My Amazing Swag Daddy(; Please?(: <3
"He cleared that very low bar for best Romney speech". Why I love
Regulating cultures through food policing - The Hindu
RT : "All I want to do is make the next film." Engaging with the audience is essential for that.
Every time I study literary criticism for too long, I have an existential crisis. My brain begins screaming "Less theory, more practice!"
All-Day Paintball Package for One or Two People at Paintball ...
o yeah, it'd be hilarious! I mean, for me anyways. Wow what a situation! I just might try it...lol
On another one sweep past all them haters like OKC
AUTO RACING: NASCAR event headlines BIR&#39;s 2012 schedule
well said
that's all I am saying. If he's guilty make him pay, but wait for the entire story...
hahahaha RT : Shocking!.. This just in... is skeptical of the PBJ-Latte :)
I don't like the Knicks bt shit lets go Melo do the damn thang
cool. I would prob do this with 6th graders but I think the age diff might be ideal - nice contrast
Welcome to EnchantingViews.com on twitter!
ok. ok. this is gonna be perfect.
#20ThingsAboutMe 16. I don't think before I speak.
Just got asked out on a date by my husband and got super giddy. Feelin like I'm 16 again :)))
pretty! :) Mine is Barbara(:
I have nothing more to give you than my heart. Spanish saying Hearts are not to be had as a gift
ok, you're in! Thank you for playing! :)
Today's Brain Floss: Dogs have 42 teeth while cats have 30 teeth. How many should you have? Reply with your guess! :)
To advocate for the 1%ers, Repubs have to choose between FlipFlop Mitt, FannyMae Newt, HandsOn Herman, & ... oh damn, I forgot.
Italian officials call off underwater search for missing in cruise liner grounding -
I should work on my swing. I heard catcher is the fastest path to the bigs. I've got 9 years left!
what's up ?
The new Broadway cast of EVITA, starring , , and , will record a cast album. Look for the CD in June!
Hi Joe, random question. Did you DM me? I got one from you but believe it to be Twitter spam. Thanks for your help.
": When girls say, "I wish I could find a guy just like you"....Are you fucking kidding me? I am a guy..Just like me. -_-"
Yes, read the books first! It will only make you more excited
Tomorrow's mantra: "Faster, more complex & CRAZIER"
Not only is quiet weather prevailing.. SO ARE THE RED SOX!!!!!
#FromThisDayForward= hon-nin myo in Buddhism. To decide to make a fresh start for the future NOW, not dwelling on the pain of your past.
love you to!! <3
I leave unattended for one day and now I have an iPhone app for the TV and no remotes.
How many sites?
It's not original with me. Our mutual friend Moe Egan was the first I noticed using the term, Doug.
luckily I've never been a huge fan of beer anyway. I'm a margarita & wine type gal.
haha when you "expand" his tweet there are other peoples tweets there
lol I'm trying to!!!!
My Twitter feed is full of scary tornadoes. Stay safe Iowa and Kansas.
"We can either settle for a country where a shrinking number of people do really well while a growing number of Americans barely get by."
Interesting week. Looking for a new job.. Sigh
AWESOME! Lucky guy. Happy Birthday to your Dad!
"Our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter." -MLK Jr.
The one...the only...Ron Pro-Kooooopez!
#ndpl 'access will always be free to the end user'
“: I'd rather listen to you take a violent dump than hear you talk about your favorite sports team.” you too ?
Noah >>> . I'm straight up watching this game like it's live & avoided spoilers
There&#39;s A Lot Riding on These Wheels: Can Three Cars Aid the Auto Revival?
I should probably go to bed soon. *3 hours later* i should probably go to bed soon. *1 hour later* Crrraaappppp.
i submitted my entry but it redirects to same page, how can i check if it went through?
My heat look good tho.
Big thanks to for supporting my study trip to St. Paul. Wrapping up my second to last day in St. Paul.
you know right :)
The goal was Di Croce's first of the year and Uribe's first assist of the season.
Guess who I found....
I hope everyone was able to pick up their #Philadelphia Daily News in this #snowstorm. The hunt starts at 12:30 p.m.
Andy Gipson...Im def mot team Obama but this guy is whacked!
Great times down here at Sol!! Can't wait for you to join us for a class or two!
Being There
yes, Josh Hamilton.
not sure if im scottsdale material yet but my neighborhood is great, actually close to a body of water
“: Kendrick Perkins going to the locker room to.take a Shit.” Funny
We talked about old times and it made me smile because you didnt forget :)
I was talking about the resturant
aww man in in Orlando! I'm coming to Dallas soon
It's FRIDAY! I'm so ready for the weekend!
Maybe set up an account for him and helped him send his first tweet?
Last full week of school 4 #SENIORS ! So stoked .
At least they didnt say that the "Fat Toad" croaked!
Turning off my phone and getting ready for take off. The flight attendent just saw me twittering lol. On my way home
thank you for spreading the word!
4 am to VU for two weeks
That, sir, is a good idea. Got any connections?
In Chicago ready for my first
Your phone literally vibrated for 15 minutes straight
#nomx3 :) RT : Sorry everyone, I may have to eat all the ribs tonight. They're yummy.
Great Choice Good vs. Evil .
Counting down the hours until my trip to AZ tomorrow!!!!! I've been missin that PHX heat!!
WVRST? RT : Bison sausage & duck fat fries were so tasty in my tummy tonight *rubs belly in manner of Tracy Jordan*
Me and Jordan Benker
I don't blame you for being you, but you can't blame me for hating it.
Follow Me For A ShoutOut
you packed and ready?
Seems like it is being streamed
“: WHOS READY FOR THIS WEEK'S COVER?!?! :)” Spongebob voice: I'm ready,I'm ready
Just what color is the sky in your little world?
Contrary to popular belief, hitting refresh obsessively doesn't make things happen any faster
that's a really good idea though.lol. three more freaking days!!!!!!
If you include musicals that *started* as films, the '39 film The Wizard of Oz turned me on to them (& Judy) when I was 5.
Happy Easter spikeymikey!!!!!!
Too early for these lovey dovey tweets. I wanna see some G ones.
So tired, but can't sleep. How stupid.
Thanks Fellas! We will definitely be representing the SJ music scene!
Now i understand how the strong friendship between Houdini & Conan Dolyle made a turn into public Fued that got personal
Well, of everyone below average, I'm definitely in the top half
I cried when my mom let my SISTER go to LONDON and not ME
Come on ravens!!
Today in Invention History: Don Ku patents wheeled suitcase with collapsible towing handle, 1994. Thank him as you head on #springbreak!
yea I actually coached an Msa team with no talent whatsoever and took em to the finals man.
Dear john :)
Le first.
Good morning! It's Wonderful Wednesday! Follow me
I miss you and will talk soon I need to come see u
Theres new lightning bgs! I did not know that.... x)
Unfortunately true-- RT : There have been more tweets about 1 Joe MVP vote than Atl not getting the right call.
brewers stink
Hurricanes really require a snuggle buddy.
have a great trip!
That's the best kind of reading!
This should be interesting....
Rant ... People who talk on their cell phones for long calls at the poker table SUCK and should lose every hand just for being so damn a ...
Literally the most ignorant thing ive ever heard. "if you've gotta D you shouldnt be aloud to graduate."
I think I drank a little too much during that Sunday Funday.
hey sexy lol
ill text you!
be careful, that's how kidnappers start off with, small talk
lol mine is an ehhh as well
happy to help!
let's link up dm your number!
David isn't on my twitter
I got a pair of RF Grandstand tix, ran $560/ticket. They have cheaper tix, but I thought HR Alley would be nice this year.
these words mean a ton. I do so want to love Him more and more. xxoo
Its not flying, its falling with style.
"how much for this bracelet?" "0 dollars. Actually..a hug."
I expected Illustrator to be Photoshop w/ vectors - but instead it's some kind of architectural blueprint rendering software
Exclusive on NBC 7 at 11pm.. Video captures local skydiver's crash that nearly left him paralyzed, his warning to other thrill seekers.
CONGRATULATIONS to for being the winner of today's book giveaway! DM us your mailing address :)
En route to - super excited to meet faculty, students, and staff!
i know whatchha mean /:
no, thank you for everything! :) its the best mothers day gift I every got mom thanks to you :)
Morgan , Girl We #GonnaGoCrazzzy 👌
can we get married or?
S/O to all of our
im so sorry I just have to say this your surper freaken HOT ;]
HAPPY HAPPY BIRTHDAY to the little cheetah that made me remember what it's like to be utterly smitten in love with what you do. Love u Kasi!
My mentions are not showing up and I am really pissed about it :\
great article. In the US, we are cutting education and increasing its price. How we will ever catch up with them?
sweet!!!!! Is it cold there
they do need alot of prayer. Everything won't be fixed but at least something will move in their hearts and minds. :)
Texas Family Law Tip of the Day: It is possible, when all else has failed, for a parent to hand a problem child to the government for care.
found you through Vulture, thank you for the wonderful dolls, made me smile.
Never understood why "you" drafted Boller and Ozzie drafted every other great Raven first-rounder.
Milwaukee County Board of Supervisors on Monday selected Supervisors Marina Dimitrijevic as Chairwoman & Peggy Romo West as 1st Vice-Chair.
look anerexic & like they starve themselves & look like they don't eat unless they have fast metabolism
Spring is Here, Air-conditioning & Refrigeration System Tune ups now available 617-792-3350 Boston
King Taco, Cal Pizza Kitchen, Paddock Area, Expo, Fan Zone Pileup
I wanted that kiss for a long time!! <3
WTF... Vidal Sassoon passed away today... #respect to a pioneer in the hair world
Did you drive past the giant butt watertank in Gaffney?
not bad for going 70 mph along hwy 18!
Does any1 else find that the typical seasonal cold becomes a week-long ordeal in bed with #benlysta?
thanks, did you run too?
It’s not too late to commit to your New Year’s Resolutions, see the apps that will help you lose those extra pounds
#askObama Wants Nasa to stretch its mission. For low orbit cede to private sector
Loved your new letter! The Lord truly speaks through your words!
finally giving into the fact I have absolutely nothing else to do and watching Captain America tonight after watching Thor last night
I totally loved Frisco Jones!
RT : Crowd source suggestions: Event venues in Chicago that are cost-friendly (for an NPO fundraiser) and can hold around 250?
Hope all is well! When are we going to get you down here?! Still waiting. =)
DON'T DO THAT SALT AND ICE! YOU COULD SERIOUSLY BURN YOU HAND! Please don't do it buck.
I want Big Sean and Wiz to come to DC
Just got to commerce casino, about to play some 60-120
Truth! ": If you can afford fast food you can afford a vegan diet. Extra bonus: you'll be with your families 15 years longer."
jeez...everyone look up here! Tonight show is going to be amazing!
Just got home.
Go Bold or Just Fold :
Should of tripped Andre Miller RT : Coulda tripped a ball player
She got da body of a godess! (Chiefin vibin to some tunes)
i roll on doobie brother albums
I know right! to me its like a curse or something like what is going on...smh
that's it, i'm changing my profile icon to stacey's.
I really do think you should do a #AUSTREAM this week!!
Ever the broken one. Eyes to the sky, heart in my hands. Searching, not finding. Marching ever on.
We will be mixing our record this weekend, hope to get you all a song by Christmas time!
same here :/ until Thursday
Las Ideas Son El Arma Esencial En La Lucha De La Humanidad (Ideas Are The Essential Weapon in Humanity’s Struggle)
them war wounded chicks go jump every new chick who enter the club lol ...
I do.. With so much cap room, why don't the #Avs buy a decent Goalie/ Defense? Holding out for new CBA?
Always... Dreaming!
Looking to collab get at me... need mixtape tracks, fuck with me on that too!! RT
HTC beats Nokia in the camera game with the Titan II (review &amp; gallery) - ZDNet (blog)
IM SO EXCITED!!
Tim Duncan, Tony Parker and Manu Ginobili begin the fourth quarter on the bench. They're probably all done for the night.
that's what I don't know since they didn't say anything I don't know if I get the car or not
I said i wasnt ever gone let gim in my truck but fuk it i need some kinda company everybody done left this bitch
It's just Paul Ryan's hope for the future. Don't worry, he daydreams a lot.
Get down to #Belvederes tonight. We're part of a kick ass lineup, headlined by #DeadPrez Gonna be THE party of the holiday weekend in
why is finding a cheap 10 degree shaft so complicated
This is by FAR the worst day at work! :(
Love the writing challenge!
this weekend I had a HOA marathon to get me ready for season 2 on Monday, will joy be in this season more?
thanks girl! Have a great weekend!
remember the cake from my last tweet??
oh fun:p
RIP RYAN DUNN u will be missed!!
So I like how its freezing like 3 weeks after it was 80 degrees wtf?
Working at Wix Lounge with Pando interns, post Chipotle burritos. Thinking about the possibility of corporate sponsorships!
Cleaning out my book bag/folders/shelving my textbooks at the end of the semester is always a strange (but nice) experience.
lol u shud see the boys in my class they're handwritin sux!
This weekend is a reminder of Christ's death and resurrection. Lets celebrate and give thanks to Him!! (like we should everyday)
nope he's just cute!
Really a fucking ticket nothing better to do? And on top of that where the fuck are my Marilyn Monroe plugs? I order them shits 3 weeks ago
also how can i link your show to my site, as well I'm looking for a web designer/administrator, your site guy did a great job
How is it that Brown gets called for diving there? Smith took a lumberjack swing at his backside? What's the guy supposed to do?
Throw that shit back
you went to that? Lol
The military was doing prostitutes as well, which someone should have figure out when they were charged 200 million for a hand job
What is there to play about...life happens only once, so just live it.
can you follow me please?
I enjoy that you just used the term "bakery associate"
why you grounded from facebook??(:
I guess since hes asleep, ill go to sleep(: goodnigggghttttt!< 3
yeah. Cave B. thanks for the dish Sean!
I vote 3... Yes, 3 :) cheers guys I'll touch bases when I arrive
noticing fans?
Now I appreciate so many things that I didn't pay attention to as a child.
It's embarrassing to watch this UCONN team with this much talent show nothing each and every game!
From an email received this morning: "You are the most awesome librarian I have ever worked with! Thanks a bunch! Have a wonderful day!!!"
fat beats brotha. Sky Monkey Business. Thanks for the follow.
I love cooking for
Not spam: I should've added a personal note. We're trying out Klout, which interprets your online influence.
They call me building climber round here haha .
Half of my heart isn't deployed. My whole heart is in Afghanistan.
seriously. It's not safe out here with the Lakers.
Absolutely! Can't wait to check it out. RT : Thanks for the shout out!
-dude on the train tonight was rocking Marlins WS cap; another w/ brilliant throwback San Jose Sharks cap. Looks great; au courant.
So now I know how crazy is too crazy for Arizonans: Rick Santorum.
": Balance your dream and your job until your dream becomes your job!"
what a long day, hope you all have an awesome night!! <3
Why can't friday come any sooner !? I just wanna see the show and then go home..
Or work, or school. RT its an unspoken rule that youre not supposed to go to the gym when its raining...right?
thanks angel!
Great conference tweets on Native American & indigenous issues MT : #iaas12 is very diverse this year w/wide range of topics
Dear ladies: if you're tired of guys staring at your boobs, just turn around. We like asses too.
Seriously?? Turgeon ejected?? Ugh come on Terps are you serious??
I'm a senior next year.:D
Laughing pretty hard at Chris Waitt's doc, A Complete History Of My Sexual Failures. It premiered in 08, check it out.
It was so encouraging to get a handmade and handwritten note in the middle of tech! Thanks again for your support!
friggin sweet man! You ready to see Dark Shadows??
#GoTribe Go tribe!!
Today I'm calling the Michelin man, as he's on a roll creating great stuff for [PROJECT-X] today.
Yes ill be able to catch Cs game...well seocnd half tonight :)
God I hate the NFL. Its freakin' APRIL and half of Sportscenter is about the damn draft.
for you...anything :)
Looking for some good new music. Any suggestions?
pitch practice time first up chills again?
Hey Pittsburgh: We're filling up fast with Prom appointments. Book yours now before it's too late. Come get gorgeous!
you're
#RARS lets go
How about we start honoring all of the other ancient and culturally irrelevant laws that are found in the Bible??
#20ThingsAboutMe I like being known as the funny girl, but I want just about everyone to know that I know how to be serious.
RT Judging by the excerpts, Romney plans to keep it simple, even a bit humdrum, at his Liberty U commencement address tomorrow.
they don't need to
ME TO
Listen to all day ! $wag :)
Do you have questions about our artists or what we do? Feel free to ask!
Interested in setting up G+ Hangout for #SMC leaders on 5/22? Best practices, brainstorming?
Cebu Philippines, The Residences Condominium at Marco Polo Cebu Real Estate Philippines ..... Sulit Real Estate - Buy and Sell Real E...
Doing my homework. I got Thelonious Monk's "brilliant corners" and "the unique..."
ah! Im so excited! Me and 2 friends are making and a song!
That's hilarious! And awesome.
Anyone in the media asking for proof of that statement? Or do we just roll with GOP cooked up "solutions" for made up problems?
us short people don't have that problem
I'm down!
Dude...that pizza is really good.
haha i thought i was the only one ;D
Was only impressed w/bynum, the rest were ok, yeah laker fans, only ok...u need more to make a run for a ring, reality check
I suffer from girlnextdooritis where the guy is friends with you and that's it ~Taylor Swift
Happy 6th Birthday !!
The MODS Squad.
what the pot?
Oh, he's a nice guy. Give him a break.
I can't help but think/hope that going after verbals is BB's issue. No secret he's done it. There has to be more to it.
if I give you a piece of paper to hold in front of your face... then I throw a rock at you... Would you STILL think paper beats rock? :P
Stanlee Gatti just bought fabric from me. I wonder what he's doing in Portland.
No matter who you are, no matter what you do, you absolutely, positively do have the power to change. – Bill Phillips
for sure but at least arse and chelsea drew this weekend...
#Rondo is in another world.
No disrespect but, Natalie Jackson is hella fine! Lmao
More haircuts at Be U means a better looking city! So tell a friend
Tip for all you networkers out there, don't try to sell me something with your elevator pitch. Get to know me and let me get to know you!
Starting back up Production of my Film-Series "The Transcendant" Tomorrow night!!! Excited, Nervous and Anxious!!! Should be fun yea!!!
It's 3:30 pm. (Otherwise known as time to go dunk my head in a cappucino).
wonderful & congrats :) you know where to find me ;)
I'm heading home. Pretty tired...
It's not a Monday without a student's parent screaming at you over the phone.
We love the good food of NC - congrats to all
He's 18 , I #Believe that #Someday he'll follow me back #NeverSayNever <3 40
Sheesh Why Is Yu all The Way From LA ??
Ok Gang! Moo's gonna keep ya company for a bit while I head home. Don't be afraid, she only eats grass and porkbelly sandwiches.
Tan doesn't equal pretty.
RT if you love Paul Higgins.
Congrats of , elected President of Student Government Association at !
Horde's overly entertaining at times. xD The new horde is awesome.
TGIF everybody! It's been a long week. I'm knackered!
The most common predator is mom's boyfriend. I base this on 13 yrs as elem principal.
I need an RSS Reader. Any suggestions?
Mobbin to Cheney with the brother:)
Time for another shot of Kenya for the morning post hockey game hangover. This stuff how so much grape flavor and natural sweetness :)
yeah & now i broke her feelings .!!! what a horrible daughter i am i just whant to die -_- ...
Cool I may send ya a follow request :-). Have a killa night!
I gotchs homie, I will check out some of your beats...
/ I MISSED that and the opening I was in hospital. Congrats to the winners 💓
Twisted Sister or Alice Cooper? Go
I went to sleep and the Magic was leading 52-25 when I woke up they had lost ...WTF!
Yes & now many R saying Santorum should stay in because they want the primary 2 go on 4 a long time (Palin).
The brand new record,"Where I Am...Where I Want To Be" came out today!! Pick it up on iTunes or Amazon.com for only $4.95!!!
Our security line is slowed because this child fell out because she doesn't want to put her bag on the belt. Help me Lord!!!
30mins of video is gonna take 2 hours of render, damn final cut
": #Grammys: #Drake looks amazing in his tux"
Thank you Maryam!!! :)
Practicing new and bizarre card games with
I waa having a nice day untill you showed up.
ah -- fair enough. i don't have any worthwhile information or advice to share. surprise, surprise haha
Just to clarify....they need to start the self-paced course before they get together live the first time, right?
Things I learn: the bar at Redwood Bar has a direct line to the LA Times news desk.
MT “: This city is blessed to have Danny Harris as a resident. cc: ” bummed to miss Ignite tonight
This is why we t have rice things!
Okaii um imma go to bed now ... Maybe ... Probably not lol well c :)
they've already played it on y100 so this isn't exactly a 'world premiere' but i'll still listen. ;-)
Sure wish I could visit. *sigh*
The opportunity in mobile is massive. Quicker to add new functionality; it bridges the digital divide.
Someone remind that jackass Donald Trump that he was born rich and managed to bankrupt a fricken casino. Twice.
French vanilla candle! Yes :)
Haha I may not be a Redskins fan but I am happy for y'all. Quality quality quarterback you guys are getting
Many of us think more about not being out maneuvered by a coworker then our own sinful and idolatrous hearts.
RT : After coaching LeBron James and Kobe Bryant, one thing is certain: Mike Brown is going to write a great book someday.
When you’re in your nineties and looking back, it’s not going to be how many awards you’ve won. It’s really what did you stand for. Did...
Morning Rockstars! > You're happiest while you're making the greatest contribution. - Robert F. Kennedy
Thrilled to get first shipment of playdough and bubbles from our amazon.com wish list. Thank you wonderful donors!
Ah cool. I can imagine your character would be a fun one to write.
sorry to hear that :( remember you are amazing and that person is an idiot. things will get better, stay strong!
Killin' time...waitin' to play some music...
Thanks for your prayers!! It went great!!!
Hawks scored more points!
please follow - you won't regret it
Interviewing some amazing women for our #adayformetahouse video today. We can't wait to share their stories with you in May!
sounds great Eric! I'll try to make it up there for sure!
Why am I awake right now ?
ttp://www.businessinsider.com Hey Tryavon, you want to act like a bad-ass, take what comes with it. You're dead now, huh?, motherfucker!
miss u all so much! I'm saving a bike for u in Weho, Melissa!
I give so people in need know they are not alone.
ready set go! See you tonight kiddo!
We did a pop up library at a hackathon in Chicago a few weeks ago.
dink or drink?
what up lil brother
Tweeting til this sleep catch up and defeat me
ttp://t.co/e6NzHW5G Haha, but so trueRT : "Let your researcher out to play with others" and other words of advice from...
text me?(:
Dear Chicago Art Gallery who twitter-blocked me, not gonna buy any of ur art anyway so I guess it doesn't matter no how.
Lol I know, it was an emergency cause her dad is sick so she had to go.
that chik revealed that she envied KK which in itself is very SAD but whatz sadder is the energy she devoted to hateration!
Dazed and confused never gets old
When my dad tries singing drake...
Thanks! I appreciate the kind words.
Ah! also freaking out about this #Neutrality business. When will we decide we can't let the Market take care of this?
hi I know your son is dealing w/ autism how did you deal w/people who didnt understand or dont?
Hah, I went with the Yeah Yeah Yeahs :-)
Hehe got to charge my phone (:
Where is it that you have discovered some of your best friends?
man im late af ...
you got it. We are stocked on beef and open til 5pm, perfect.
i will be hearing mass later in the evening..
R.C. is proud to have Cincy By The Slice as a valued new client. More to come! Big news coming from R.C. in late December/early January...
I ride dirty, tryna get filthy!
Reading Cameron Stauth's "The Franchise" and chuckled at a cameo appearance by "Portland columnist David Kahn."
MPL's website recently went Drupal - I only work a small piece of it, but once the set-up is done, it is fairly easy
Anyone else sick and tired of being sick and tired of everything?? What is your solution to the ridiculous everyday norm?
shit filling out this paperwork for disability
Sadly many think freedom comes physically in reality the mind is what is imprisoned! Find something to be thankful for! Happy Wednesday!
lawlz i give up. ive been trying forever to get madison to follow / tweet me. he never will.” amen to this
Why, oh why, is there a "very long wait" for a DVD of Cabaret, America? Really?
Magazine 'issue' of the day: A cover with embroidered boots can't compete with a cover of celebrities or current events.
how? Did yoou see me wheen I came from lunchh?
I'm headed to my studio at 2233 Park Ave., Orange Park, Florida. If you are in the area stop by and say hi. I look forward to meeting you!!
Good bye Spirit Lake! Heading back to Georgia.
Group run tonight! Meet at Leif/Thurman gate at 6:00.
.....and the longest week ever continues. ready to dominate final 2 out of 4 though.
It was toasty this morning. Summer running is here!
Help spread the #mmj LOVE with tokedtees...... We do custom designs just ask!
hahaha they're all so cute. Allison is my personal favorite.
Haha me too, always have the iPad in the bathroom with Pandora playing
I hate when people retweet simple things like when someone says goodmorning
When are you leaving?<AB
I know some of the best programmers in the world, I wanna get them to give Egypt an unhackable online based election process....
Hi! informed me that you oversee the #xsquad models and that we should chat soon.
How am I not myself?
#imagine Harry pulls you close to his body and kisses you.
Damn I blinked and the fight was over! Lol
I think it's safe to say that linsanity only lasted a week lol lol!!
suppressors How to make a silencer for an airsoft gun?
Still looking for Actors and Actress in the DC/Maryland/Virginia area for my short film...if you know anyone who is interested hit me up
Hm, hey guys!
SHUT...the front door -_-
Anything with bacon is bound to be a winner! Wish I had a reason to be in that neck of the woods ... :)
We offer free shipping
Having resolved that my old 100 pound television won't be joining me in NYC, I am convinced it knows and is watching me wretchedly
ennuendo? An Italian enema?
Oh good. Someone to blame lolRT : I didn't just jinx something, did I?
You too! Black sheep before kids are outta school June 13?!
Nice! What will you draw?
Guys that are hoes turn me the fuck off...ew
The why isn't important lol. But as to the how, the "focused" tweet about u grinding. It's true. Made me think of a piece to write
just downloaded it. Does it really tell you where it's specifically located instead of just an address?
I dunno. It's late here in Mphs TN. Thought u were a chick. Please disregard. I'm buzzed. Gnite :)
Ok allergies stop making me look like I've been crying all night. Love Spring - hate allergies.
Oh agreed. Plenty of LDS folks do NOT use their faith as an oppressive tool. Exceptions abound.
Missing my Southern Comfort living ATOWN! Free Paris Ross shout out Playa Made, CME, DJ Blu 400 Block, College Park
Keep me posted on Coach B and CofC! Btw.. Tupelo Honey yet?
what's up with your website?
packers and badgers both play tonight ... really excited to c russell wilson start at qb for bucky!
its not his serious job, I think he is in highschool.. And I dont even talk to him, I just see him a lot, haha:)
I will be participating in Santacon, downtown PDX. Catch me if you can.......
He's 18 , I #Believe that #Someday he'll follow me back #NeverSayNever <3 42
Looking forward to seeing you, Beth!! So glad you're returning to Philly!! We shall welcome you like crazy!!
You don't count...you have 700+ :)
you're too kind :) thank YOU for your support. We're never giving up until we have Lauren.
It's about time for another Rant Shop contest/giveaway. What shall it be?
If there was an Olympic event for water bottle filling, you are looking at the gold medalist.
Lol or not
Thank you, and *absolutely* let's talk again! Thanks for reaching out today! Happy writing!
Longest 24 hours of my life :p good to be home! :)
We'd probably make a video for Superhero or Fool For You!
Bulls showed 2nite they r a complete team. Bench Mob 56 miabench 15
EVERYONE TREND
I seriously don't know. maybe it wasn't heroin. it might have been cocaine. but either way right
With less than 15 mins remaining the score is still tied at zero. Great defense has been played by both teams
lucky... I'm not going either !
my phone was stolen.... no way to contact anyone. dm me your # please.....
it's okay. Everyone likes my faces
You act like im invisible to you.
I'm mad at I wanted to go to the movies 2morrow to c act lik a lady think lik a man n she talkin bout she has a date
RT if you love and will support him for ever and ever and ever x♥♥♥♥♥♥♥
Reviews by and for parents/families who have children with #specialneeds and those living w/SN - ONLY at www.knowledgesafari.com!
Remember when Jorts gave Sullinger that Spaulding tattoo? That was awesome.
Just got thru a rough patch but feeling better, thanks. Research is slow going but have time now to forge ahead ;)
YOU CANT DO THIS TO ME!!<3
It's a little cranky out there in the wet, kids!
I feel greater to be the Creator
We are too! RT “: I'm pumped for . and . tomorrow night at .”
Shame the blame game.
Stories like this, the "racist rock", even Tom Hanks video...have all the adults left the planet?": If we can't distinguish
I like the rain today. Hope it rains tomorrow too.
so jelly, ok gurl! I was speaking of the annual meeting actually, are you going?
hi tweeter!
OMG. I miss that.
I loved your poem in the
Gimme a girl to look up at the stars with me and then I will be happy.
ha nice. Should be called the all American
I thought true grit was pretty good at that
nothing I will back to home after 7 days now in egypt its 6:45pm ! Egypt is a nice country I love it ! So do u finish u exams ?
this girl.
Even tho we lost, I had a great night.(:
i'm so screwed. so screwed.
The zip commercial on pandora has came on so many times, I memorized it!
11 - 0 in hardcore sabotage? I dont hate it
hi! I'm repping up in PDX now. Wouldn't be friends of if we didn't meet up for some In?
Oh so I guess the grammys are on
Handy-down, cannon-bomb, stumb, stunder, Uncle Loe, Uncle Leff... kids say the darndest things.
"It's a hootenany in the USA!!!"
hi terri and friends, hope your day went well
“: I got money, hoes, money and hoes”
": Niall is/was at waxy o'connells watching the leinster rugby game!"
Too bad this isn't going to get done until Lame Duck by which time tens of thousands will have been laid off.
2 old men tonight asked me if I played golf cause I looked familiar..but I had no idea who their granddaughters were lol
Booked nomiya restaurant on top of the Palais de Tokyo in Paris for dinner...on the fence for Jules Verne in the Eiffel tower.
Fat, drunk & happy Hilton-style in my pool cabana with cocktails, fruit + cheese plates AND a flat screen TV. Is this real life?
Going to the Grand Rapids Art Museum, UICA, and Kendall College Art galleries tomorrow!
6 days ago me and hilton lapier visit netcong, nj. It was fidelity and zeal..
I cannot believe the Police said this isn't a big deal .. When it is . My life could be at risk ..
“: "Three day weekend" Sunday is the only Sunday I'll ever like.”
How about them cats and mkg is the man
Today was a good ass day
do we hae practice today??
Kinsler deciding not to run on Markakis...smart choice
Gen. Washington informs the Massachusetts Legislature the army will need 10,000 cords of wood the first and 200 tons of hay for the winter.
Thank you for the #FF love , , , and
you wanted to be a background dancer huh ?
I love sitting outside at night to look at the stars and the moon
because it has you and Alex involved(; haha(: what would you do if he read all this.?
Woohoo! Thanks for the follow back!
Never leave signs of pets when your house is on the market.
There are so many birds inside walmart...yet theres no bird crap?? these are the things to ponder
Yea… i'm a big 'online brand' enthusiast. These are all great topics. Do you see certain ideas/topics being overlooked?
Lovely cup of Joe this a.m. You are tweetastic! xx
Storming like crazy in Atlanta!
it's old. And not quite as cute.
Hey - I'm loving , brilliant experiment! Have you ever seen any of 's stuff on metacurrencies?
new graphic up on my myspace. feel free to show some love
dam i wanna be like Heff where are all the nice sexy ladies at? get at me. ;) in the words of pit bull ill make sure ur peach fees peachy ;)
Both coyote goals tonight were cheap ones.
thank god he doesn't have a twitter right haha & i know this is so much easier said than done but get over him. you deserve it
Shopping spree to get longer skirts and bike shorts for the She Cub because her legs are crazy growing.
If hunger is not the problem, then eating is not the solution
Gonna be at the six figure business school bright and early in tha AM. Can't wait to learn multiple streams of income!!!
Breakfast compliments of and a Kindle Fire. Thanks and I have the best kids and hubby!!
Culberson did get his 1st hit yesterday in Arizona in front of his family which was way cool.
The first step in changing your culture is defining the new one with incredible clarity.
I Love You So Much Ms.Janet!!
that's a better image.
Thank you Angela for the tweet about our event tomorrow night!
not sure I tried calling her .. Maybe ritz?
“ Right! She got balls tonight RT Cynthia bold tonight I see.”/Lets see how far her balls take her. Marlo coming.
people do not understand how much i hate the cta! 😡 i hate it but i love my school.
Sweet, looks awesome Kevin! Think there's place for a icon on or on your personal site? :)
That makes me gag. Howevs, I still curse you and your skinniness.
While I wouldn't call it full confirmation of 's #bbp, it def was more evidence than you've shown as of late.
Envy is a murdering spirit that exists mostly between brothers with the same dream (I.e. Cain & Abel). AVOID IT!
well, i generally agree with portnow's paen to music ed. but doesn't excuse the fact that he's a slimey corporate lobbyist
Can I put my head in between your tits and fall asleep tonight?
will do!
it's okk
Happy saturday! let the recording begin. CD makin' time
i () absolutely love chiptole. def. my fav place to eat on the road.
Pls follow back
text me need to talk to u guys
"the safeway select Justin Timberlake" dude's rap bio just made him instantly endearing
lol right? it just made me so sad for her. i can't imagine how you can grow up in the 21st century and end up like that
$5 glasses of wine & $7.99 all-you-can-eat pasta tonight. Don't miss out!
--> I can imagine o_O
Thanks Kyle! :)
whats your favorite thing to do besides dance and basketball ? And follow me ? <3336
Last day on this planet as a 28 year old...gonna be a good one!
Of course not. It's mid May. So it's the second game. RT : first game with the roof open?
Goaallll!:) #ilovethepens I think that was Martins first goal this season...? Not sure:)
the snow<----wear your galoshes & bundle up!
To believe what has not occurred in history will not occur at all, is to argue disbelief in the dignity of man. -Mahatma Gandhi
Thanks so much! I'm definitely too selfish. Imagine spending all your moolah on diapers. No, please.
MariAna peed all over me while watching the Oscars
hey(: my mom said tht you your mom and ur sis can come thursday to da party (: ♥
Where is the best place to start for modern Iron Man? Do I need to go all the way back to Civil War?
Oops. I forgot to wear green. O_o
Going for a workout and meeting up with some friends...Mr. Samuel it was nice seeing you and enjoying a great evening! See ya again soon!
All along the watchtower. They'll be singing the song forever.
Gear check complete for #drydensocial. I got 7 hours of 5 second timelapse images on one card. Likely picking up a 2nd.
#edshow GSA plans party with SECRET SERVICE "service" for first GAY PRESIDENT ( exotic menu)
The Cobb Wrap - delicious! RT : Better late than never! What did you have today, Adam?
Why should you beg people or even advertise in order for them to follow you?? #imjustsaying :-) #Insecure? #GainConfidence?? Lol
it never fails
How's your Isagenix coming Megan?
Walkin through some sketchy ass woods catchin frogs.
entertain me!
Young & Reckless. I'm bout that life.
Reality is merely an illusion, albeit a very persistent one.
It's rainy, windy & cool. Step Ahead clients stay dry. Not only is the car steps away from the door. ..so is the driver with an umbrella!
I'm getting good at saying goodbye.
#3 on IMDb's comparable titles list for All God's Creatures? Gone With the Wind. This of course means AGC is also a timeless classic. Word.
Happy 6th Birthday !
go to their page. In the upper right hand corner click on the gray icon. It'll give u option to block
going to the game tomorrow??
Ate 20% more wings but they were 15% off with my Jacket Backers discount. Graceland.
thanks for standing up for animals, Rose.
Happy B-Day & V-Day, ! Totally going to Target to get your CD!!! Love you and your music! :D
I'm announcing my intent to have a twitter marriage. Any ladies want a (soon to be twice) published author as a sugar daddy?
going to bed. not tired though :/
Me: "I know you're lying." Boy: "I swear on my Mustang I didn't prank call you today."
I think I have work in the morning. I don't remember though Hm
that cheating sonofabitch. I got the same email!
When I'm 16 I'm getting my tongue pierced!
Okay!! And I've had my eye on this for awhile 4 u so hush ;-)
toe cramp!!
These dudes steady flockin !
is extremely wise with the tweets today.
Goin to bed I had a busy day today and going to have a busy day tomorrow then school Monday school school how we love school not love u all
Tired, so so tired x.x
Extras!! We need you for a shooting this Sunday. Please contact Liana Afuni at: , ASAP!
Nothin major though.
Kindness is the language which the deaf can hear and the blind can see. ~Mark Twain
; for one more chance to hold you close <3
[end rant]
Setting up for this banquet...
Thanks for the RT Laurie! Hope you liked the blog post on
Thanks for the following! Merry Christmas!
Got my hopes up
Too much to lose, so I won't leave.
I get to follow the Oil and Gas Industry
Happiness is being happy.
weed head / nympho
Can someone just make a TV show about life as an #Occupy protestor? K thx
are there any tour dates or exhibits planned for Los Angeles in the near future? I'd love to stand face to face with secrets.
Gotta hate this feeling
Only a couple hours left for the #HereWePurple deals. Finds them all in one spot with the Qponomics app for your smartphone. Free download!
The silhouette of a rabbit on the toast is pretty cool, too.
insurance provider $15,000 in medical expenses? That's the NYS cap. The real medical $$ total is closer to $35K. Bk in court next Tuesday.
how will we know them when we see them ?
Thank you for including me too.
looking forward to this!
I learned early on the importance of separating my self-worth with my work & creative ideas. Thrive in a critical environ't.
We moms have similar sentiments. Love your post. And the closing quote gave me chills!
YEAH...TODAY WAS SPRING CLEAN DAY :(
great game tonight! you should video chat with your tweeps on #spreecast. dm me for more details.
I think fleshing that out on your home page would help frame understanding of its value a lot
The only pop albums I've gotten into this year are Electra Heart and Trespassing. And Born To Die, if you consider that to be pop.
Bitches love Ryan Gosling but lets face it he's
Groupon and the like are normally cheaper than turning up on the day. for example is awesome
Huff just needs to strap the rally thong back on. It's so obvious!
I was just thinking that!
Yeah, funny story...it was & idea, but they forgot. Appears WE won out :)
Food Fact of the Day: April 27, 1995 On 'Seinfeld' Kramer began sculpting with pasta.
RT : "thanks Partner #1stClassBand in the Building #Palace on Plume : good luck today I know u will
you're welcome.
....... you obviously are doing crack right now...
Shouts out to the females who wear more make up then clothes. You made ya daddy proud.
Moyer should be happy he has a job and work on trying to keep it.
My little sis made a twitter! I can only imagine what she'll tweet about! Follow her b/c I said so
follow me me me me me me me me me me me me!
: O ok dats wats up how old is he? Step in2 my office real quick...
Turns out our Facebook page requires you to ask for an invite. Please do so, and I will add you. Thanks!
Modesto is crackin right now, Latin Fest!!!
Where do you stand on being "Facebook Official"? Is it a relationship if it doesn't exist on Facebook? Thoughts...
How's Newt doing today? Heard he launched his 2016 campaign. Is that true?
thanks for the follow bro. #golow tomorrow
Scanner pics are the new upskirt
Thanks for the follow. Looking forward to keeping up with you and hearing about your journey. We're a racing family too.
How do we balance that w/ sincere creation? RT The Rethink Music morning theme? Embrace ubiquity.
hahaha! i saw it on profile! it looks really good! :D
Hey there, great to connect! I enjoyed meeting Scott, you two were cracking me up with the Auburn/Bama chat!
#teamallnighter is still up at 10:50 AM EST
Just a humble Rhode Islander abroad. In Boston.
Oh definitely. I saw the 154-minute one at the Wisconsin Film Fest, and the first thing I thought when it was over was "That's it?"
Red soxs player Will Middlebrook is getting married to a former cowboys cheerleader. They've known each other since they were 12 (':
think I'll be otherwise occupied then or I would've considered it
Fascinating updates from about role of local library when press descends on a small town.
You know it.
if I ever get married instead of walking down the isle, I'm gonna big step down it lol.
has done a lot of their music for their commercials...
This game is giving me an ulcer.
The Honors Newsletter team is looking for contributing writers! E-mail for more info!
You're so wise. You're like a miniature Buddha, covered in hair. I'm sure is more your style
are you ok?? What happened??
This is out of control!
Katie and Chadd bought a house today!! Congrats!!
Guys are so lucky. Be a girl for a day fuckers.
yep and then somelol
care to lax?
Flying int'l and I got a whole damn row to myself!!! Sweet! This never happens.
lately i've been slacking off on my homework.. im kinda disappointed
Here's to the American Man
Can't sleep 😔
I feel like dumb people have so many more witticisms memorized than I do. Respect.
Trainer/kill-buyer combinations are not unusual at smaller racetracks!~Jo Anne Normile, CANTER founder
I'm not doing this anymore.
"I thought your last name was Astonish!" LOL
be safe.
kinda wants to go past the govt center, out of morbid curiosity.
i can honestly say im lovin my life rite now...i do what i want...OAN; new music comin soon...
Don't you think that FB has the same issues as Pinterest, though? People post all kinds of photos & share them there.
Did anyone catch our President Victoria Schmitt in the RBJ?
Apple, Google, Amazon and Facebook - These described by OpenCape CEO as The Four Riders of the Apocalypse
Thanks to for finally letting me come check out ! Hope the filming went well.
If you RT teen quote accounts i'm unfollowing you.
www.youtube.com SEARCH KARISSA LYNN. It would really mean a lot. Thank you if you have already!
Your face Pau Gasol is what happens when you get beat up continuously as a child.
Turning onto I-70 W at Washington, PA. Snow still coming down. Road wet but not slick. Taking our time. 3ppl awake w/ driver.
wadup bro, just hittin up parties, what about you?
In Music Meeting A Place to Bury Strangers “Keep Slipping Away” Still the echoes of The Jesus & Mary Chain, I like this band Do U?
Off and running for the weekend? Who has a race this weekend?
lmao trynna put his name on it ...
Pancakes for breakfast and #TinaTurner on my iPhone - good morning, kids!
I wish this guy would stop leaning on me
Music feeds the soul , so fill up on the music
Trying to find a good movie to watch with my little sister from Big Brothers Big Sisters. Is the Karate Kid worth seeing?
#NFLrookie advice: Just like any celebrity, athletes have a popularity cycle. Start now thinking about the kind of legend you hope to become
You should introduce yourself.
West couldn't even get the smear right. It is supposed to be 80 members of #dsa. And that is not true either.
Someone play me on words with friends or something... Oh my gosh I'm bored.
Offensive foul? What
It's sad days when that happens haha
Old meaning of sorry. “I won’t do it again.” New meaning of sorry. “Damn I got caught, next time I need to be more careful.”
Dear Mikah Sykes, Really sorry about your dinner. I'd love to hear more about your experience and what you did not like.
No patdown today and I'm even wearing my David Beckhams
disagree. No team has heart like my team
is giving away a brand new XPS 13 laptop tonight & again tomorrow! Stop by booth #1503 to enter to win!
I'm glad that Hollie stayed but why did it have to be ?!?!?!? :( :(
You iz Kind, You iz Smart, You iz important!!!
Mad Men!
yep, we kinda rock the house =)
The firemountain catalog is the one I just got - it's like a thousand pages of temptation :-)
When Mahomies tell me 'I hope you get a chance to meet Austin oneday' gives me hope that I WILL meet him oneday.. <33
FIT2GO MENU OF THE WEEK – What’s for lunch? This week you can have our lime chicken, steak with bell peppers, and turkey curry salad....
To know what people really think, pay regard to what they do, rather than what they say. ~ Descartes
Of all spots in the library I have to sit next to the chick who chews with her mouth open.
Who wants to play draw something!?
Haha hm it's a presentation and i hate those, i always like freeze up... oh btw, are you at the jack marshall ball in sept?
couldn't agree more
mama asked about you this am ! thank u for tellin us u made it safely :-P
The great original. A true legend. He took the banjo to new heights
agreed, and not especially easy to distinguish.
Hey ! I haven't screwed up anything yet! Woo hoo!
Weeks can't snag the liner, and Hart was guarding the line, so Stubbs scores from first on what should've been a single.
Wish we had a picture of that tagged Porsche. Just sayin...
Hahaha! These guys are IDIOTS on #flippedoff. This is a show about everything NOT to do when investing in Real Estate. No joke.
Just got done wit my first final 2 more
Wow, Good morning!
Omigod ROCK THE BELLS!!
wondering if figured out what I did to his phone yet.
Change the wording to "Throw a football at Brett Favre" and see it skyrocket.
YOU GUYS MAKE SNAPBACKS LOOK SO CUTE <3.
By the way, Kings take game 1 over the Blues. LA has got to be the hottest team in the playoffs. Watch out for the dangerous 8 seed!
People are so weird omfg
I LOVE RICE.
#badideajeans without a doubt
yo fool hmu if you want the bread
#MadMen tease a lot of big things up front. Let's see what this week of madness has to offer
Haha yelling my name.
Uh time to work
are and competitors?
Very cute.
Hope you can cross paths at #sxsw, both doing great work w/ community media + questions of representation
not having anything to do<<<<
Msg Rec from OkCupid: "Maybe we could meet for brunch or coffee and feed some ducks at a park." Me: Actually, yes! (OMG, finally)
INDIANA!!! who Needs Tickets?!
Achievement unlocked: 5 days of the sheets staying tucked in at the foot of the bed.
as a Chiefs & Bears fan I have less questions about Mclellin & many more about Poe.
Ug. Just learned Dow SIS is being discontinued. ZIP-R not available yet. Anyone know of other insulated sheathing?
i think the store deb was made for me
man, I'm jealous. No food trucks ever come out to Pikesville. Hey we should add that to the article!
At least you didn't lose your lunch!
you should check your DM's<333 hehe. Just a suggestion :D
Good to see you house! I found an answer to your excellent question: 70K. ;)
Young and Stupid Left Wide Open Hearts Are Wasted Lives Are Broken
got to give #BYU props, they capitalized on mistakes, and played stellar defense when it counted. #UHsb plays now at 3 pm HT today
“: Online advertising and targeting does not equal cheap - it's a valuable tool - not something to throw in the mix"
Oh! I WANNA DANCE WITH SOMEBODY! I WANNA FEEL THE HEAT WITH SOMEBODY! YEAH I WANNA DANCE WITH SOMEBODY! WITH SOMEBODY WHO LOVES ME!
Listening to 's wondervisions and it's starting to feel like spring.
YES. So is
I'm interested in working with you. I'm an engineer based in New York City, working at U should come by...
how do u knew tyler
I don't wanna brag but yes, I have 61 followers. Aiming for 1 more follower then Barack Obama!
there is no such thing as NPR
I have been known to freak out on people at the grocery store who only put 1 or 2 items in a plastic bag. Biggest pet peeve.
Preserving our past for our future.
Following you back now homie
Nature holds the perfect balance within the natural rhythm of life's cycles and it is this, we must aim to integrate within our own life.
CRAZY good game. Come on #UNCAsheville!
Good Morning fellow tweeters!
hey fancy pants! Nick and I are running the September race in Denver. Have I started training? Nope.
That's awesome! Happy to hear you have no regrets! :)
I prefer Chucks over Jordans, I smoke weed outta papers, I listen to The Kooks, and I'm still G as fuck, fool...
I'm so HIGHKEY jealous of the 2012 classes @ other schools . . Cause all us ehs seniors had a fucked up year . No kinda fun , no nothing
Signs of a Great day
Back in Pittsburgh (again). N got right n my bed.
Get off my stage
Nemo a.k.a Pashaa will be spinning a delicious blend of Trendy Beats and Sexy Grooves with his famous " KEEP THE VIBE ALIVE " Radio Show...
Follow Back?:) ♥
Thanks, I'll pass this along! And if you two ever require an extra reader/listener/nerdfighter/etc, I'm here for ya!
Think I'm going to add a POE injector this time. Hasn't been an issue yet but I can certainly justify it all the same
I'm good....u kno jcp laid me off? Smh bitches
Fresh fitted tonight
Check us out at www.watchnhllive.com for all the NHL games live online just register and enjoy the games!!!
Hope everyone's enjoying the last day of "winter"! :D
Sick today :-(
this is what I get for hooking up mailchimp to my twitter acct. yes, craftsman - Tom Colicchio asked us to change - honor?
And I honestly cant deal w india being drunk when im sober
My mind is officially blown
Presenting to the Tacoma Angel Network screening committee today
lol I'm from Brooklyn ny
nice to see I'm not alone in the predawn category on a Saturday! :)
Still catching up, but I'm liking it a lot! Super helpful for crossing over to web. Well done
Ron Roy, Rob Paul, Ron Paul. Know the difference!
“: #EveryoneHasThat1Friend who will be your Maid of Honor one day.”
J: Who is the good guy in Beowulf? C: Beowulf. J: I'm going to be bad at teaching Brit Lit, aren't I?
yes it is.. the one of my fav songs *-*
RT : What if deja vu means you actually died, and are returning to your last checkpoint?
Regarding my last post, I for one certainly enjoy them
The only people you need in life are the ones that need you in theirs.
Wet and rusting.
Gatorade is SO HARD to open.
No SPAM!
The sea really is calling.
wrap party for 1 is white wine.
Let the woman respond to what happened back then!!
": As Mercury transits through Taurus, the mind may want to be a "Master Builder" - bringing ideas into form. #astrology"right
OMG I SEEN MYSELF IN THE VIDEO <333 you guys are amazingg<3333
Sweet dreams...
So called me today and told me what to do for auditions. My acting dream is starting to come true 
D'oh. I am devastated to be getting on a three hour flight w/o a pen. I feel naked, and not a confident naked. Pens 4 sale @ thairport suck!
Okay, Chicago, it's TEN degrees warmer there than it is here. I'm impressed.
Do you read local food blogs? If so, what's your favorite?
#20factsaboutme 10) I think my ex might kill me in the future
hell yeah it is.
Thanks Coach. I appreciate you.
Gavin Floyd turned out aight for those Whitesox meanwhile Kyle Kendrick
Trivia n' Beer Date! <3 “: All Crafts and Imports $3 from 8-10. Trivia at 9. Drink beer, win beer.”
we love to see people reusing their JT bags:)
yes sir and they are in postseason form
I think that I shall never see a poem as lovely as a tree.
no it's not. He is precious! You be good to him!
Holy pain..
HAPPY BIRTHDAY
Realtor: first you folks tell me what you can afford, then we'll have a good laugh and go on from there :D
What I learned today, can burp like a dude and it's hot The more you know...Shooting Star!!!!
and everybody else LOL
"When you do the common things in life in an uncommon way, you will command the attention of the world." George Washington Carver
aww I love u too 🐛
WGVU - FM 88.5 just broadcast my recording of "There Never Will Be Another You"! Aloha Allendale MI!!
Seriously! Some snow has its merits (4 -6 wks, tops) - Of course I grew up in Wisconsin so I'm a bit biased as well...
Just a reminder...I can now be seen in the recently released music video for "Marry Me" by top selling band !
are you in Dublin?
is loosing her battle with cancer quickly. PLEASE PLEASE PLEASE tweet her, just so she knows you love her.!!
Ha! Use of "NoPo" leads to drug deals, saggy pants, rap booming from cars, and Decline of St Johns Civilization
gotcha so if you count the 3rd TD for Shipley then it would be Gilbert's 2nd TD pass, correct?
yea but they only sold a few vip 2day and sellin the rest at 10am....ill c u there
There's always next year ;-)
Things I wish somebody reminded me of in grad school: your membership fees go way up when you land a job!
For the first time, I feel like Mr. NotSoSmooth.....
CONGRATS! RT : Officially part of the University of South Carolina Class of 2016
Hey and ! Wish that you could post a list of wwe superstars who are on social networks. There are so many fakers !
Sometimes I play for real points, sometimes I play for style points, either way, I always win lol
I'm not a big fan either. He's a heck of a play and one of the best ever, but he takes lots of bad shots sometimes.
Demi says hi.
Meeting today to find out about our last 2 mnths here in Berwyn. Gotta find new work, and hope that CFD hires sooner then later.
Anyone use hotmail? I still do & have been flooded w/ SPAM the last 2 weeks. WTF? Guess it's time to use gmail full time.
i know :( i better be invited to your grad party, or i will be very mad!!!
never use USB anymore, but patrons might still
Shane, here's your tweet. =D
Thursday spelled backwards always spells c-r-a-z-y.
Why lie?just keep it 100%
Just saw the commercial on for #SW3 #StorageWarsSeason3 in June along with
Please respond to the text I sent u and Chelsea.
Atta boy A-rod
What a great Waukesha food blog! Nice breakdown by location of eateries around Waukesha and good reviews.
Target baby!
takes one to know one 😉
Really?! And you'd give that away free?
And that's who I'm going with!!
btw thanks for rocking the guitar solos in both those great cuts
Have you tried replacing your password with a pass-phrase? word-number-word-number etc. it's harder to hack
Braces thurs, start shooting sat. & sun., Have one audition fri. and maybe anther audition the day i shoot, ugh! I'm feeling tired already
what temp are you going with? Thinking of doing one this weekend.
What? Sheriffs?
Another fun game you should play with your family is called Quelf. Definitely a fun game that will have non-stop laughing :)
It was great to see you too! I really enjoyed seeing
Will there ever be an end to music?
This one really hurts. RT MCA too?! Screw you, universe.
I had a good night.
“Life stands before me like an eternal spring with new and brilliant clothes.” ~ Carl Friedrich Gauss
Already know...But if it makes u feel better...knock yourself out.
[I'll Have Another] wins the 138th running of the Kentucky Derby.
you're missing one hell of a time down here in extended!
ugh why should she he was a cheater shes better off without him
The traffic jams have been no fun, the Central line is halfway done. When all the work is finally through, All aboard the new choo-choo!
...was already there, and that TV has merely demonstrated that not all the performers are well trained. - Edward R. Murrow
Just finish cooking now getting ready for work 3rd shift......
A little dance party while getting ready for my date night with
The #moon is insane tonight. Absolutely beautiful!!!
When your tweet mentions anything related to Kansas City Jazz, use the hashtag
Finally home and will be at the ballpark tonight. Can't wait!
With my brother at the orthodontist, he's getting braces
My favorite holiday.. I get the chance to thank my best friend for everything she's done for me 😊 I love you mom.
Is Greinke wearing his Cerveceros jersey again, today?
How times have changed: As kids we used a rotary phone to talk & 4 TV channels. My 11 yr. son is video chatting with his friends. I love it
when will u come to seatle washington? it makes me sad every time ithink bout how u never com:[
Through every girl and back. Lolol
Like Horse Feathers? RT "Someone try and put the word Feathers in their band name."
I notice there hasn't been any Liz on #GH for a while. Where are my Liz and Ewen scenes?
went to the mall Hung with Fam took the out watched movies also and finishes with the pool lol
cooked for ny baby
YES its still going on ........30 cent beers. Come in and find out what its all about!
It's the same reason that you can't get NFL Sunday Ticket on cable.
Padres tonight, chiro now. Maintenance keeps a tall girl straight. Congrats to my husband whose buyers just closed a great house.
Damn be having me pitching tents like I'm on a camping retreat #YouDaOne - XavierLT.com
but not by anyone any better. Unless you start trading.
Do more of what makes you happy
Enjoy a wonderful day, Ted!! *virtual hugs*
Doesn't matter, still getting 100 mil from the Yankees or Red Sox in a month or so.
Feel better . Come to GA on your next tour so we can give you our gift next time! :)
Marriage is like a phone call in the night: first the ring, and then you wake up.
& I smoke alotta weed to keep them niggas off my mind.
You guys were right. The Avenger's was really good!
not sure what you just said, but I agree with you!
Today, we are at ASTD New Orleans Work Smarter, Not Longer chapter development.
lol always gotta start an argument.. Yea we haven't argued in a while lol
How could I get into one of those #TEAMBACKPACK cyphers?
Despite those 7 glorious hours of sleep Jack gave me last night, I'm still exhausted. How long does one have to sleep to feel 'caught up'?
haha its easy!
I know! It's so good, and it's like dirt cheap if you just get the California rolls!
“: #GhettoTranslations : "you aint bout that life" -- your living standards are not fit for the situation at hand”😭😭😭😭😭😭
A great way to get new clients is to ask the right questions, but give no answers over the phone.
working out after a two month hiatus HURTS! Can't wait to see how tomorrow feels...:(
you make me smile c: i loves you too. Haha
LOVE riding that Indie Music Bus !! RT
I think husbands or significant others turn into newborns when they are ill! Right? Actually-collicky newborns!
I'm late for school cause aine wanna wake up.
I bought them 4 my mom for mothers day and she decided to read a passage I wanted to stab my ears out
Just heard your dad call into WCBM Radio in Baltimore .. he was touting his son .. and rightfully so. Keep up the good work!
Show on Sunday July 31st at Arnetic in Deep Ellum! Be there! Be there! Be there!
dangit... now I'm hungry!
Thanks for the mention Shane! See you Thursday night.
The Man gives a shout out to the Tweeter in the corner.
The Grey is really good
RT : Currently in Tulsa: A Few Clouds and 88°
she is..
Wieters is just sick.
My text messages right now <
Does anyone know where they are at now in the difference? Last I heard they were at 3%?
So now that #ROWE 2.0 has been born, I want you to start thinking about ROWE 3.0. Have that ready by tomorrow.
Just discovered my new found #talent of finding awesome parking spots.
Aye, I use it, rather regularly. It's still a quite-nice program; less glitchy than google video chat at times.
friday funday. we are eating Mediterranean food for lunch. therefore coupon code for a new waterproof shuffle is: FALAFEL $11 off
Thanks for dropping by last night! Did you get a chance to slurp some Oysters?
I woke up face down in my pillow. Blonde headed sluts did me in !
Excited about our event next week w/the Japanese Ambassador to the U.S. Expecting a great turnout from the entertainment/creative community
20-Inch Wheels Bmx Freestyle/Jump Bike By Mongoose ...
Matt Canada has about as good a resume as one can hope for having coached at Indiana and NIU ... which is to say, still kinda crappy.
This fool said I'm gon kidnap you, marry you, then have your babies...you don't have to thank me lol smh
This cutting back on meat thing sucks... I want BACON!
Hannah&Jenna--U are both awesome:) RT HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO OUR FAVORITE SUPERSTAR!!(: we love you!!!:D
shopped at Trader Joe's on Vine 4 the 1st time. Ppl more aggressive than me! Total came to $7.77. One of the Baldwins checked out behind me
Now that Santorum has dropped out, the GOP is about to go full force with negative campaigning about Pres. Obama.
lol if you had games I can almost guarantee he would skip mine to go to yours :(
absolutely, and pre-season is the worst time to go back too, think ill just stay away for now.
Give your favorite chat room a shout out below....
Good morning! Andaluz will open from 11am to 9pm today! We are still getting more fab new merchandise!
REALLY?! <3 oh my gosh.
RT : so, much, good, music!
Omg! Chelsea score. Now 2-2 on aggregate and Chelsea have an away goal. Barca has to score again to go through ..
lol I was just telling some about that the other day. He emotionally scared.
Get rid of all your excess debt NOW-if you are in Texas, ask us about a refinance-rates might be better than you think!
all day
best tweet i've ever seen!
★ ★ We can help you with one small detail for your upcoming event....or we can help plan the whole thing! ★ ★
JUST WIN, BABY!!!
RT : I love being a writer. What I can’t stand is the paperwork. PETER DE VRIES
TLC its all waterfalls, Hope you don't get wet when the waterfalls.
Only 5 weeks....
unsilent night 4... Ah can't wait (:
The Droidax 1600mAh lithium-ion battery replacement for Sony Xperia Arc is long lasting, lightweight and powerful.
dont think I did? Text me at 2703178082
no Jazz Fest for me alas. will be thinking of you !!!
I'm a gentleman, and you're a liar. \m/
Tell me what u think about the new profile pic
Splendid revelation today, I can look like I'm enjoying bottles of beer when it's really hard cider.
lol it'll be fine either way trust. Just find the right crowd to chill with throughout your time here.
If you guys haven't checked out yet, you're missing out. That's our #FollowFriday recommendation. What's yours?
awesome, congrats!
i'd be in.
Just got a chance to watch USA Indoors, !!!!! Orale Simon Que Si!!!!
Bases Juiced!
Lol. Kay! Did you ever take the GED test? I miss you and your bitch in classes. :(
#Imagine Austin Fan Boying about you everyday!
I don't care if you don't like Austin but just show some respect. K bye.
there was 60+ GB of stuff in my trash bin? pro tip: empty your trash bin
Your Mysterious Bookshop staff for Wednesday 04/25/12 is Dan and Ian!
Practiced piano this afternoon. Tonight, I'm chilling out after a long week.
My character in the film "Vengeance" has a really crappy day tomorrow.
Good food, good coffee, good conversation... GOODNESS OVERLOAD!! You are definitely too sexy for this song.
Good Morning .... Fresh new start to the fresh new weeK / month : )
yeah it was a nice day :) and getting in n out after was amazing! Lol
Play Your Part Everything Else Falls In Place...
BTW Ever heard of Mother Mother's "Bright Idea"? Got stuck on that song today.
odd jobs around my neighborhood. Text me.
In airport awaiting delayed flight I plug computer to kiosk w/3 others NO power They're ALL sheep Not one noticed I lose faith in humanity
I can paint one in yours as well. :)
I'm about to order Pizza Hut & make them deliver it to HML again ...
sure just did:) be sure to check us out and let us know what you think:)
How bout some Leuer w/ my Monta?!
A game that is John Lackey vs Brian Matusz should be banned from TV for graphic and disturbing imagery.
Thanks for following me!
Will have to read
SHOUT OUT FOLLOW Shes Amazing 
Getting ready for a wonderful talk in Chicago. Love Chi Town!
follow back? :)
I'm sure we can see what's going on after work. No water, !
yup yup!
SXSW party was amazing! We met so many cool people. Y'all rule. Special thanks to
I am paying attention
Are you watching the Ravens battle the Seahawks today? Do you have any game day predictions?
": I Don't Watch NBA or Anything, But I Take It This Steve Blake Guy Sucks? Lol"--- he just ain't clutch
Well Good Morn sunshine
RT : Shoutout to my girl because she sends me music files ✌
Which one can leave when he likes?
Evening to myself tonight.
First day fly fishing this year....froze & zipped but still better than work.
Decorated & finished shopping .. Now ready for the week.. Game night & 2 thanksgivings woo .. I love the holidays!!! <3 <3
Too many details to share in 140 chars-plz DM me an I'll provide a phone #
Math is the only class that makes me feel STUPID AF' -____-'
At Red Sox game... It's gotta be 50/50 Red Sox-Rockies fans...They already have the "Let's go Red Sox" chant going.... Only 1 pitch so far!
Love that!
oh hey!
RT #Obama2012slogans: “One thing for sure, if something went wrong – it wasn’t our fault!”
I really can't wait till school is out.
s/o to my new follower y
When a staff member brings an accusation against another staff member, it's up to the manager to do some fact finding before responding.
Pailla: This could be an ad-hoc committee with a deadline, keeping in mind student obligations, bipartisan, 8-9 people.
Meetup for Open Textbooks Reason 7: "Best practices on using open resources"
Clarity, peace, serenity
I picked Kansas to be in the final four!
The chorus to The National's "Abel" is "my mind's gnarly", and I won't be convinced otherwise.
i just wanna let it go for the night
Anyone have a place in Venice that needs a housesitter in a week?
Re: I'll go with you!! I'm dieing to see it too.
thanks for the follow...
and yes, this is all I have to talk about in the mid-7th of a 7-2 #Brewers lead...
this too is a warning.... :P
no, not even sure what it is... Sounds like something that would further my disappointment in humanity. >_<
Listening to and are #thingsbetterthanSOPA i love these boys so F*** sopa and ur censorship
Hello , Im curious, my sister is named Kristine Neri, she lives in GA,
Trend today gone tomorrow
W8ing to get NFS Platinum when I get headset, tired of racing for last trophy
And ! RT : Happy birthday !
Eating a healthy Subway sandwich when I really want the greasy DoubleDown from KFC. Damn my body, why can't you handle fat better.
Do you have a great attitude? Are you well-spoken and confident? Then you are the sales consultant we're looking for! Email us your resume.
": ok, stop the tease, spill the beans." Yeah! Give us something here! :)
Almost fell on the guy next to me on te trolley. This day is going to be hilarious.
youu even said it yourself darling, noo need too lie on twitter(:
RT that when you find out ! And a vitamin for alertness. I want to quit coffee :/
That's funny...Maybe, I should worry more about the vegetables that have suffered/sacrificed themselves for my meal tonight?
Seriously. RT : ! Fix your audio!!!
mom. if I can't get my skinny jeans off, I doubt a rapist can.
victoria secret <3
- I remember seeing the video for "Spanish Sahara" and being entranced by the images & sound.
what a show! thanks #ABQ. stay tuned for more 2011 dates!
Cameroon pres elections holding Sunday, October 9. About 21 candidates running against incumbent president
realizing i have horrible posture when i'm in my office desk chair. now that i'm 32 i really do have to work on these things.
": Why is monday so far away from friday, but friday is so close to monday!!!??"
oh ok..you didn't miss anything b/c it was a flashback episode to the very beginning when she 1st started plotting her revenge
I think when there are widely available pictures of you doing keg stands in your underwear, you kind of accept a success-free life.
Im pretty sure Sopo rec will be open at 3 today
Cardiology deals with the diagnosis and treatment of various disorders of heart and blood vessels.
Ah, note to self: Facebook is not the place to be dramatic. Professors begin to ask questions then.
You know what the most expensive part of shopping on-line is? Shipping charges! We don't have any! http//www.sharperdefense.com
I'd say PDX weather is a little schizo in the Spring. :)
come to MOA
Just ate my weight in !
You suck. Can't display a pic.twitter image natively in android app, click link, get mobile twitter sign-in, lose URL!!!
where what
Thanks all who attended PerformanceAnxiety @ CultureFix! We had a great turnout & an amazing night! Look forward to seeing you again soon!
we are pretty bad about that...
You have to turn your talents into profits
It has been a long 10 months but I am proud of myself. Celibacy looks good on me. Continuing to move forward...
#e2conf: "If you don't have an enterprise-wide collaboration system, how can your employees effectively use social media externally?"
Thank you David, we're pretty excited about it too!! :-)
yall wanna go watch the playoff games with me??
One of the smoothies here is called Hangover Healer
#RG3OverLuck Drew Bledsoe was a guy who could make all of the throws and look where his career ended up. He's got that Killer Instinct!
people these days
RT : Just left the studio with my niggas and workin on some heat!!!!
today only comes once
Bale hails from Wales
what type of photography?
NFL seriously considering discontinuing its pro-bowl game, which is usually played in Hawaii. Discussions continue w/ NFL Players Assoc.
My science class is crazy
Now three and counting
how about meeting Thursday after work ?
Boo. (Yeah, I'll admit it) On the plus side, I now no longer watch the CW, which is probably healthy. RT : The CW cancels 'Ringer'
true love is like ghosts,which everyone talks about but few have seen it
you're a joke
Did u get an answer? I can only see the parts of the conversation from the people I follow. So I can c u, but not Tracy.
wrapping up a great week of boating and hanging with the family. a few more intense wrestling matches with the dog, then flying back to MKE
Had to talk to my siblings about adding MY friends on facebook.
Just got word Jason will be wearing his 3Bet 'Run Good?" shirt at the FT. Hope you RUN GOOD!
Didnt you know ignorance is the "new" kewl lmao j/k Got to love stupid ppl.
Globalnet Telecom.. Bespoke pricing & solutions for any business. Also recruiting Channel Partners throughout the UK. Call: 0844 880 2010
Dating's not about sex? :)
Spending my free day catching up on some crafting. :)
The nuns!
I don't know if there is research on it, but I see it as true. "Good job!" doesn't come out easily.
follow me, I'll send u a DM with my txt
Do you need to "Cure Your Male Pattern Boredom"? Visit www.machorhino.com! (via )
Happy St. Patty's Day everyone! Slainte!
Woot! Deal! :-) Happy birthday to you!!
": My dad's wearing a snapback..what a steezer lol" Suegro got swag, what you talkin' bout! Lol
I want this relationship to last .
Models finally casted!!! Show on Wednesday! It's bout to go off!
So, tomorrow is FRIDAY!
Be better than me.
lucky you :/
It's worth pointing out again. is less interested in truth than I am in brussel sprouts
Nothing is fool-proof to a sufficiently talented fool.
Ugh that's the worst. Good luck!
Amen RT : reminder to sport management students: You can't degree yourself into a job, and there is no substitute for experience.
would be a sweet matchup. We'll see if the Fly Boys can get past GW on Tuesday. You know how they fare against bad teams
Veteran Day Special - All Top Shelf Strains @ $35 an 8th: Purple Rhino, Alaskan Thunder Fuck, Sour Diesel, Lemon Diesel, Island Sweet Skunk
no worries ill keep them safe.
Enjoying an 80-degree day in beautiful Lake Forest. Many great patriots here.
So much homework I have to do, but I don't feel like doing any of it..
you already know!
thanks! I appreciate the follow
congratulations ahead of time!!! Enjoy every second of YOUR day. It goes by so fast!💐
WHYGO Automates 1100 Public Video Conferencing Rooms Worldwide - San Francisco Chronicle (press release)
Yes sir! Next time you're down you'll have to grab a plate! :)
yep that sign screams virginia alright...
no worries! will have the archive up soon, Cheers!
Blah, I'm bored I need people to text me (:
I believe it gives them false hope in many cases."you let me go, but you want me in network?"
“: No matter how hard I try, I can never look at you & pretend like I feel nothing. <3”
Have 3 kittens that are so little they still have umbilical cords attached. Animal control was gonna euthanize them. They need homes. HELP!!
tell your friend veronica, it's time to celebrate
That's a good one, I always teach it in first-year comp. classes.
CG will have to be closed today...back tomorrow at noon!
Apparently, they rig up a radar system that brings in the whole "A-2...miss" thing too.
A guy who's the triple threat #SomeoneIWantToMeet (;
Missing my sisters and and karla hurry up and,come home dang!
So today I learned a teacher in my school has a brother that is going to be one of the opening acts for One Direction…
lmao, you aint never lied... And Marcus, who says he never sent that message he thought I was trying to leave him alone
Pepsi free? #bttf RT : up can't give you a tab until you order
yea, pre 27, the east was not stacked? im talking teams, not individuals.
I'll be there RT : The Ronald McDonald House of Indiana hosts Swing for the Kids at Broadmoor Country Cub, tomorrow
Will buy but only if you promise to use the 5 bucks to buy a Cinnabon. Btw, great interview on NPR.
Our biggest enemies are the neoliberal tendencies within ourselves. Kill the wanna-be Hollywood mogul in your head.
Northway usually. Big, Bright, Shiny. Any of them are fine.
No hahaha. We never talk lol.
Rocking the shades
Sex. In America an obsession. In other parts of the world a fact.
They need to be happy he's alive! Forget rushing him home
So, 3 different pizza places just showed up at our house, none of them were ordered by us. Who did it hahah.
I can’t wait to see how terrible and pixelated the entire Internet looks on the new retina MacBook Pro.
So naughty....
go to bed!
Hi Kurt - thanks so much for your RT! Hope all is well & you & your family are staying dry here in Austin.
Today, thus far: rain, sleet, rain-snow mix, snow-rain mix, sleety snow, snow. Enough!
So im an hour off schedule. Didn't get the memo
to me, db is step in interpreting evidence, by cataloging, regularizing, relating it.
Thanks! Followed you back. Happy Tuesday. :-)
We are what we repeatedly do. #Excellence, therefore, is not an act but a habit- #Aristotle - make #healthyliving a habit
Or Roots
Please follow me!:) We are waiting for you and Austin will come to Chicago!:D
#sca2012 Good morning. SCA session on digital curation: here's Heather Yager, Computer History Museum, on selecting open-source software.
- I've been a Trekkie since birth (I never had a chance). It's so close... I'll have to visit the Twin Peaks locations soon.
well there went an hour and a half my employer will never get back
Remember that awesome speech made at Sundance a couple years ago? Anyone know how the distribution of RED STATE is going?
Dang proved me wrong huh boo! Everyone give minaj_stan a round of applause twitted him!
lucky you, would you had got in trouble?
the Frankenstein ish ones?! I wanted those, but we were to broke at the time.
Happy Birthday...have a good one:)
sounds good, Gallery Hop is on that Saturday too, we could promote heavily on High St
She can love you good but I can fuck you beta...
No judgement here! People who don't like mayo just say that because they don't want to sound 'fat.' EVERYONE LOVES IT.
I'm not sick. I feel perfectly fine.
Just finished talking to my mom on the phone. Another ca-razy saturday night in our world!
have fun buddy!
got a gun?
You're looking sunny,
Sorry Guys not the real PacMan just a fan!! Follow the real pacman I'm just a fan guys!!
RT “: For another great chat, will be joining #shiftingthemonkey chat on his book tomorrow at 9cst #educoach”
I thought it was an awesome show live. I actually thought there was a chance Cole had the belt won in the main. Great match.
The reNEWBOLD project page is officially ready for tomorrow's launch. Going to pass out now.
"so far as we know the entire benefit of dietary fiber comes through it's conversion to short -chain fats by probiotic gut bacteria"
Twelve hrs shooting .... Tomorrow twelve hrs again .... I'm beat :-(
All day! RT : Who wants to see a hilarious blog site for done by your boy? RT if u feel it!
have fun!
Match Rule #8: Don't sign up if you've been drinking.
Cooking channel has great recipes for fun and easy dishes. TWEET ME THEIR RECIPES alton brown
all of u follow me!
Just bought a new bikini top and wedges for Las Vegas next week! , ,
thanks for the #FF :-)
Lookin for Boone Pickens @ the #BedlamBaseball game. Gonna ask him if I can tie my wiener shaped banner to his G6.
RT : Gonna have a long ass day tmrw
ya just one sec
RT : I really should be studying right now. Whoopss
"Don't be afraid to give up the good to go for the great." John D. Rockefeller
#WeWillAlwaysSupportYouAustin I Will Always Support You Austin<3 never forget that your mahomies love you and will never give up on you:)
Samee here ! /; RT : I need to see my baee asap:/
#NowPlaying - Missy Higgins - Don't Ever
I need cable lol
Thanks Brian...Cheers!
"101" also looks like a herd of dalmatians.
“: We're looking forward to seeing everyone tonight !!” me too!
I do now thanks to
Hi Michael, thanks for the #FF mention - I hope you're doing well!
Get these fuck boys off the court
legit video
Oh ya lol he's the alpha now!
I MEANT "why didn't you say HI to us?" And thus ends my attempts at witty replies to others' tweets.
I haven't taken a nap in forever!
what would your song be?
Hoping the Coyotes tie this series up tonight.
Well tell me then
See everyone tonight at my Presidents Reception! www.chesapeaketech.org
who Courtney?
Awesome!! I'm glad you had the chance to experience it and you found it amazing. Hope you share your experience with others.
So far so good. Only feel slightly dirty.
I trust people if they don't give me a reason not to buy once my trust is gone theres no way in hell to get it back
This #pencilchat is seriously funny. Check it out!
images + lots of contrast, convert to 1px by height, look for bits that are black, those are your images. ewlarson
: nothing. I haven't knitted or crocheted in weeks. I have little to nothing left.
RT #nmsplc "If you don't know a subject you can't teach it. If you aren't a content expert the equation doesn't balance." Craig Barrett
If Brown stays right he'll keep tea party happy but no one else. He said he'd be independent - not just a NO.
It's in those moments God corrects you.. you're Instantly Humbled.
See you in a few. I'm changing shoes.
and I have a table outside!
Grab Bag Sale continues! Just realized how much great stuff we are basically giving away! Ops ;)
now he is howling
#progressparty hosts inc +Neil,Fallon,Laura&James Z
PVK throws down an awesome 400im tonight. Love it when the guys race off events and kick some ass in the process.
Be extra creative and extra vigilant to keep up with tech in the coming year. Play and explore. -
Glad to hear they liked the demo! It rocks bro!
Seth is anxious about going to Texas tomorrow for the Dylan #Ratigan show to talk about #Wevegottimetohelp. He will do great!
sweet! Let me know and I can meet you for ones without the service charge!
Marriage is a beautiful thing! Congrats to the newlyweds Robert & Ariana Garcia!
Your Stupid Game Addiction Earned Zynga $321 Million Last Quarter
Pukka's love tea..rose, chamomile,lavender.yum
SNOW 2.0 Investments in the biz: Personnel, data centers, #cloud ops, cloud architecture,
how did you like the fencing show?
We graduate in 21!
Get On Fb Little One
Woke up to the message I was not looking from her
Trust the boat that knows the ocean.
80 cappers with wk FB plays posted so far with cons sount up but not listed yet. Bigg FB Sat coming and will have consensus plays posted
Commencement wknd at ! Congrats all! Shout out to my seniors! It has been a privilege. See you later!
Thak you so much! Support greatly needed.
Niggas be lying over that petty shit.
i'm not spending any money tomorrow!!! i'm done will anyone be in the I'M #OCBound !!
Who"s the big winner tonight ?
Love a #naturist special getaway 4 nights $399 visit us
Odd, I did yeah... I will have another go at it. The email on your page, right? Maybe Andrew doesn't like my gmail account?
scared to death that John Cusack is supposed to save us all from oblivion in 2012! What happened? Wasn't Bruce Willis available?!
Woah... Julie can sleep tweet...
And you could have just gotten me a ticket to each of those places... Would make my year! or Life!!
Hey roise whats up with ur show on own did they cancel it or r u on vac please tell me u r coming back on???
I should watch #Glee right when I wake up everyday...sets the right tone.
#Imagine Justin brings Pattie on stage & he sings Turn To You on the Believe Tour. Beliebers will flood the entire arena with tears. THIS (:
can be such a b**** and I love her for it.
Back to learning about Compass Learning Odyssey. Will I be able to use this in my classroom?
I was just thinking about that, but I have no idea .__.
Just got the first shipment of supplies for Warped tour!! Cant fucking wait!!! -G
The English destroyed a Paspahegh town in August 1610 and executed Wowinchapuncke’s wife and children.
On The Menu: Salsa
just found the kittens!
Agreed, one of many players who connecs w/ fans thru social media. 130+ guys on Twitter!
Twany in the first half?
False alarm. Show tonight cancelled.
you should go to the chocolate factory hey
Not ready for state tests; ESPECIALLY math -_-
Finish watching Yankees game with grandfather! :)
I went to his office and he was there lol. We talked for a min and he gave me a book on the HIstory of Rock n Roll
Oops was she talking to me? Earphones are in babygirl :)
oh oh ... >> hides vintage Blackhawks sweatshirt <<
over the summer you will never be at your house- it will be great XD
"Happy Monday" is an oxymoron like American Education.
Today is the day of the #sls12! Yes, there will be awesome speakers. Yes, there will be great panels. Yes, it will be epic.
lol that's funny man
I appreciate your tweet and attention, MPSE!
if i were to see you in public, what should i do? lol
Love that three of the best women journalists are right here at home
feel better
Send my best to Jo'burg/Jozi/eGoli
That I Don't Care Look People Have In Pictures<<
grl.! The next few wks should b interesting
looks so delicious! Can't wait to try it.
we did good we won! but it was so hot everyone was like passing out it was scary haha. hbu?
Galileo at Csc w f Murray Abraham is just brilliant.
I miss Maxx
#edumooc3 like the live panel but wiah the webinar (Elluminate?) screen was more visible
m chantrel mushroom bisque. i'll be going on a run tonight...
Congratulations to all the students that walked today! #HookEm \\m//
lmao I knoo! U had them white ppl in front of us weak
Thanks bro! “: hell yeah brotha ill b watchin here on internet!”
Best conference ever attended: 1st International Small Giants Summit in Konstanz, Germany. Great sessions. Great parties.
Who just saw our Big mac McDonald's commercial featuring old school hip hop during the Bears game? GO Bears and Happy Holidays!
Lemon layer cake is so scrumptious with 7 minute frosting. A true lemon curd makes the best filling. Happy birthday!
$10 free gift card with purchase of every $25 card you buy! The holiday gift everyone will love ~ today only!
Good News: We have four more SloPig tickets to give away! We'll post a new question at 4 p.m. today.
Nah I'm good.
Yeah most likely. I think they open 1/2 hour earlier last week of month!
... eh, he was okay. Nothing spectacular. Hes a fucking bum tho obviously.
what are the pros to it?
hahahaha okay sounds like a plan!!! Lets do this! Lol
I repeat....why is Jefferson in the game?? Lee won the first game. Give him a shot!
Getting ready to start my session on Games in 101GH. Quite a crowd already!
At Al's Den tonight for some music from Lewi Longmire. It's great to put the spotlight on all the great talent here. Live on KGW.
#ThingsTwitterDoesntCareAbout School!!! RT If you hate when ppl tweet about ppl at their school that you don't even know!!! (Follow Me!!!)
isn't that normal? RT : #shehechat so room full of people to talk to at #amcchicago and I'm sitting in the corner with my phone. :)
bless you!
Going to see Hanna with my step-mom. The last film she saw in a theatre was Vanilla Sky.
I'm single and chillin' and y'all lonely and stressing.
Hey there
and more taking the same emt and my English. Start the intermediate and all the bios next term
Romney's secretary of state will be Jesus, the secretary of defense will be a Jesussaurus Rex, the secretary of commerce a Mr. Fig Newton
Hail storm in Denver right now... Crazy
Google+ Hangout! RT : Let's all Skype While Tweeting #foodiechats A8 #foodiechats That Ways we All Dine Together!!
RT : Just an FYI: The "news" of a contract extension for Ohio State's Gene Smith is from a release from October of 2008.
Went from sea level to 6700+.Forgot it makes you suck wind.SO my golf game isn't what it should be.OK, it never is, but now have an excuse.
Votto getting walked like his new contact deserves.
Face your problems. Don't facebook your problems.
Good seeing you today. It's been a while..
I have nick <3
You have a point! but most of us spend most of our time unaware of our Union - so there is an opportunity for achievement
Will Ferrell is wearing my mothers old shag rug as a toupee on SNL. Guess he trumped my Dinner plans. Asshole
#HighBloodPressure Ways to Combat Mindless Eating Ways to Combat Mindless Eating
&#39;Avengers&#39; full of Hulk-ing fun
That's Closer thinking ! RT : Russell OK with new duties. Says closers have to be a little messed up, and he fits that.
Yes! #saysthe13yearoldgirlinme RT: : Are there really people out there who want to watch #TitanicIn3D .... ?
we have gobstoppers. U jelly?
We are OPEN today for all of your pool party/day off/drank too much at the race/lunch and dinner needs.
And you wonder why people don't want you around.
Hotel reported we had ~0300 people on the wireless at the keynote this morning at #CILDC - not bad for an area the hotel wifi doesnt reach.
If you post self portraits on the Internet, stop it...
yes it worth it if u are Chinese lol
We are excited that is supporting gala!
had a splender on her ass lol her booty was bleeding.
Breakfast with grandma and gramps! 😊😘
Meetings that serve no purpose just suck! This is a complete waste of time & 3 hours of my life I'll never get back.
Oh OK! Thank you!
Chris Rock has definitely been the funniest presenter so far, and I love that he totally practiced the foreign names
Its starting to feel fally at night in NJ. I am happy to get a taste.
I could live on chips & salsa...
ok for now a pillow then maybe next time braclets
Having a great birthday today!
RT : Damn girl, you've got a Mubarak. (an ass that won't quit)
What does I shamrock new York mean?
There will be a time when your dreams will come true. That's when u will have to support others to make it posible too! DREAM BIG. DB
Also, I may be wrong about the deadline. ACRL is 2/15, but maybe not everything is?
u think that the retirement of b roy hurts or harms the team.
yo dick big
I've asked on Facebook before...but are any of my Twitter followers amazing website designers? I'm in the market. :)
#whosgonnalose - Jacksonville at New England - Jacksonville will lose
This street is never ending !
Just finished day 1 at the seattle bike expo, come check it out tomorrow! :)
Wish you could come watch a game with us, that silly job of yours really gets in the way!
Via LATimes/Shanghai protesters outside a Starbucks were arrested for denouncing high food costs. No hi coffee price protests reported.
Did just say Peyton Manning, the brother of YOUR New York Giants QB, Eli Manning on NBC Nightly News.
Put a shirt on Chris Brown
he deserves it...that's why I love JR
Oh wow congrats! That sounds great, is it your film or are you seeing someone else's?
RIP Levon Helm.I just saw him 3 wks ago and his voice sounded mouch better than it did 2 yrs ago. God bless, he played until the day he died
Had such a god night =) I need more nights like that!! Love you ArielBeezy & our krew out in Tempe, the Condo was Amazing!!!
I think the most important quality needed to become a successful entrepreneur is self-discipline. You need it in every aspect of your life.
thx for the follow!!
Pre-register online or call 282-4630 for Digital Pictures with Flickr at the Main Library on February 21st at 11:30am.
I'm wondering whether banning mobiles in the classroom is missing the point - use technology to support learning
long island
What About Your Fans From WASHINGTON? Don't You Love Us Too!? :(
"The Dry Land" is sold out.
Watching VH1 100 greatest songs of 00's. WTF happened to music?
oh sorry:(
Man will you stop your nonsense on Floyd! He's not scared of anybody. I would pay to see smith/bayless fight
Our sponsor Printing Partners has been named to The BCA 10: Best Companies Supporting the Arts in America for 2011. Congratulations!
I thought that place was dead to you
i followed
re your comment: OH HELL YES. And thank you.
I bought a skirt @ deedee & edee and I often get compliments when I wear it! A stylish shop with great clothes and jewelry.
GUYS I CAN'T THOUGH LIKE IS HE EVEN REAL HOW IS SOMEONE THAT FUCKING PERFECT
What do u do for work now?
How did I never turn right at the #MilwaukeeArtMuseum and run through Lake Shore State Park until last week?!
WEDS HAPPY HOUR @ THE SMILING MOOSE= 1/2 OFF ALL CRAFT/MICRO/IMPORT BEERS, $2 OFF ALL SLIDERS, $1 OFF ALL OTHER DRINKS From 5-7pm! GET HERE
#Falanghina is one of my favorites but not well known I don't think, in the US. Do you have a favorite producer?
I've gotta pee but I don't feel like it
Don't Stop Me Now - Queen
My mama Bday party today I caint wait to kick they ass in some Bid it's going down
make sure you can afford 's meal stipend!!! Might be a deal breaker!
On the inside?
About to head to now
this segmented hose or faucet thing looks kind of like a big insect leg?!
How to avoid sprawl in mil.base reuse? College campus only economical option?
me also would love to do today
There is 2 other people in my class, and a teacher..
I wish I could grow a beard.
you don't listen to very good music
Had such a great time last night at #IRIS at the Kodak Theatre. My fave Cirque show to date!! Although, #Zumanity is a close second ;)
Interesting point
hahaha well im tan but im kinda red
t someone that sounded like a great person. I said I'll meet them and I do it. Sorry if it seems like something else. But its nothing. T ...
Good morning sexy pants!!!! Have a FAB weekend loves!!! Muah! Xo
he's trusting his closer, well at least somewhat
“: just started studying John, so happy to have your podcasts to go along w/it!!” //
Hrmmm no and the show breaks down. Coincidence? I think not! #he'sthegluethatheldtheshowtogether
Time to head for gym:((
yes if u want to send something in do so quickly
cue Rob Bell
Boy, those #Badgers are looking good! :)
Haven't been on here in months so I guess I'll play around a second
interesting how you came to Twitter to tell us about your Tumblr. A link might be helpful Mr. Mayfield.
Chorizo Burrito makes troubles go away.
can you please #FOLLOWMECODY for ? it would make her day!55
JOIN AIGA! it's awesome. I volunteered once and now I am on the events programming committee. Lots of great people.
If the Devils score again, I can't see how the Flyers come back.
Dear MTV, I was wondering if I could get my "M" back...ya know, since you're not really using it. Sincerely, _usic
City of Laredo Texas Home Expo 2009 Sat and Sund July 11 and 12th at the LEC Arena. Register to win 2 roundtrip tickets to Las Vegas
“: I've seen them! They're right across from my dentist.” yep they are pretty
RT No Problem. #iSupport #Art RT Today is one of those days where I need to feel the LOVE! THANK YOU!
k wut. why is #tumblr down. now i can't go to sleep...
Thanks Dinosaur Train and for teaching the kid to eat his greens like a "hungry hungry herbivore"
Lmao this boy walking down the hallway saying my mans boner was higher than his ACT lmao!!!
thanks for the ri!
I feel yu
lol I know I'm in the same class as you
What? American Express offers it.
See poet Christian Bok's work in this area.
ya but what's the point in staying nothing so hat Monday thank u
actually, bitch. i hope you don't come back to parkway tomorrow, cause you're annoying and cosmo is so much better without you:)
My Dad is expressing interest in getting an iPhone. Oh boy!
Reading Gregory Corso's Elegiac Feelings American. Inspired to pick it up once again by Sonic Youth who pays tribute to Corso on new album
Just watched another epic performance by on StageIt! Check back tomorrow for a full review!
Shirley - viewed in its general tenor and substance
Jeremy Lin sounds like Matt Saracen
You owe me if not! If it's not, you follow me mister! That's the deal! Hahaha But serious, I want you to be proud of it.
Just found out about the party.. Hope I haven't missed much
I'm always flattered when asked if The Handy Craftsman is a franchise. I take this question as a compliment.
thank YOU! I downloaded it and am looking forward to reading it!
#Houston's daughter treated &released from LA hospital for stress & anxiety. Bobbi still out on tour
A man's silence is wonderful to listen to.
SHOUT OUT TO YOU GUYS!!! GO AND FOLLOW THEM!
haven't had a chance to listen yet, but I will let you know once I do. :-) /
From I'd rather suck my dads dick then yours
She's the SWEETEST girl!!! And she still has puppy breath!!! =))
well let me know if you want to get together later, I'll probably leave Charlotte in late morning
Aw, your so nice! (:
Praying for texas Lord send help keep the families in texas in Jesus name Amen
lol....you know this...MAN!! haha MISS YOU MY CHRISTA!!!!
"If she read Fear Street instead of Goosebumps, she'll put out."
Prepare to tailor your style every six months for fashion maintence
Good for him! Why do R's want to destroy our country's beauty with such fervor and glee! Stop backing big oil!
“All journeys have secret destinations of which the traveler is unaware.” - Martin Buber, German philosopher
Another promising historical that pub'd today - Bernard Cornwell's new title THE FORT about American Revolution
Is there a link to the release?
one time i joked to my mom and said "i like my men how i like my coffee. black." and now she says wiz khalifa is my husband :-(
Time to pack for SF!!! Hate packing but it'll be way worth it!!
We are all connected to one another in the heart.
Dj Robbie Rob!
drink and think of as many patriot insults as possible. Much love!!
ohh that's nice to hear :) soo what u been up too?
the start of a story (if the whole thing loads) If you like it there is more writing on the "writtings" page at tomsmithguitarist.com. He
There's 8:01 remaining in the first period. I wonder what's coming up next...
It's kinda bullshit that so many airport kiosks sell sweatshirts but not pants. What if I need pants?!
Sierra! :D
Now they're making crap up.
Amen sista! Words of wisdom!
morning' Glen
Thanks for the follow, I really look forward to your tweets #voiceover #voice over
"relational" dbs come out of cs decades ago; cs approaches/philosophies as varied as dh is.
I am a ceiling fan, especially during rain.
« I love my girls »
hey I have an Exam wish me luck?? (: xo
I really wanted to see The Hunger Games tomorrow.
I think what freaked the airport security out the most was I so relaxed about it. I was like, "I can take off my pants too, if you'd like."
I'm sure she's exceptional. Post to us about bachelorhood and how it made you and your relationship better!
Take It Take It To The Floor. Show em Show Em How We Roll. Drop It Drop It Drop It Low. Drop Drop It Low Drop Drop It Low. Ctfuuuuu.
yes welcome back Zizzzzzzo
i will be back on
I like the cupcakes.
BIG congrats to Brian and the on 10 years in AdMo!!!! Big Up!
High of 23 today. Get your hat/scarf ready! (finally!)
Before Christ, I was NOTHING. With Him, ALL things are possible.
tyvm! Getting out the word!
oh i love <3 RT 3 more days until I get to see my wifey
I don't know how to tell you this...so I'll just say it: You rock my socks.
the weekend of the 28th
paris thats my fav. eventhough the star are blind if you show me real love baby l show you mines..
spinach, leeks, artichokes, onions and garlic - divine!
Wellingderps and David... we are all so sadistic
Understanding the role of "Hydrocarbon Wealth" is fundamental to understanding the the Middle East.
Radio_pirate thanks i hope so too! Thats gonna be an Awesome birthday present!!!!
You forgot the first rule of remakes, Jill. Don't fuck with the original!
: What?! This is so disheartening. People really need to get over themselves. Ugh.
Argh. I hate how Daylight Savings Time screws up my Dreamweaver synchronization data.
That is terrible..... But still laughing hard:-) thanks for the laugh!
The app is excellent--fast, simple way to find books and have them sent to your local branch. (Yes I still read actual books.)
are you also a speed talker?
Lets go Show off that pink driver.
I am so captivated by what's happening in Syria.I understand there's hurdles, but surely there's something to be done to stop the massacre.
": I need to learn to stop expecting so much." Words from the wise
One man drinking games is my favorite mayday parade song, omg.
I don't like running in the rain.
That's very comforting. Coming from a marketing major at a party school.
I watch Ubaldo pitch the same way I want a horror movie: hands over my eyes, peeking between my fingers, braced for something bad to happen.
shower + nap.
Bottles bottles bottles bottles and more bottles "drunk" (with a head nod)
Think you know your #Medeco? Find out today during my certification class. Questions will be asked. Reply back to win
What did you say you would do in 2011 that you haven't started yet?
We all have a function in the body in order for it to operation as it should.
If a movie isn't a hit right out of the gate, they drop it
Happy Birthday to Mr.
Are there any good new imagines??(:
RT : Brilliant use of social media; Cobra escapes from Bronx Zoo, tweets, has 163k followers in days.
I would definatly have to say timessqaure. (:
RT : Boy: Would you like to be the sun of my Life? Girl: Aww... yes! Boy: Then stay 9,995,887.6 miles away from me."
This Boston game suck now ... it feel like I'm watching a high skool game now ..!
On my way back to the Big Apple after an amazing few days away.
thanks for posting about our drupal meet up!
Only you can make my body tremble like Leo in 'Titanic', or Cusack in 'Say Anything'.
Thanks to our new followers , , and You make us feel so popular!
See you Saturday?! <3
Very cool, Sara. And that's a great pic. ;-)
Thanks for the retweet
You're really making it hard to concentrate
uhm..then stop tweeting me? Like seriously? It goes both ways. And same to you darling.
“: US Hispanic spending power to hit $1.5 trillion in 2015 from $1 trillion in 2010. ~Nielsen via
Thankfully, it is all better because of parrots.
maybe we need to make a chant out of that...
Holy Jesus ! I'm so surprised Christina got rid of Jesse Campbell !!
#resume #tips Talking to a woman soon in TX (?) about SEO and how it applies to resume writing and all that! -Jason
ouch, you get tornados? That sucks. We get gnarly earthquakes
you're a better man than I
Time for bed i got this 10 hour drive back home tomorrow
It's funny how the power of someone's writing on a page has the power to make people think it's authority.
We saw it twice today. Beautiful words and beautiful music; our 7 yo daughter was mesmerized.
. The Color Kittens by Margaret Wise Brown. "The kittens fell asleep in the warm dark night with all their colors out of sight..."
do you represent ?
been meaning to change our icon. I DONT HAVE BRACES ANYMORE! emily pick a picture and edit it aalrady?
how was dinner?
Why the crap was Lindsay Lohan on Glee tonight? & why in the world did they refer to her as "America's sweetheart"? No just no.
saw Black Death at the burton last night; readying my #beakdoctorcostume for Halloween
Might be able to bring a bit of chili to the globes tonight, so you don't have to go hungry.
Hat's off to Hers was the best of talks today!
Those interested in comics and computerishness might be interested in the comic markup language from
Wow, congrats Man City!
Oh, perfect! We're covered, then. :)
Better yet, proofread and then have someone else proofread it too.
Yes very much so, new system, he will get his shot! RT: ": speights an option now?
its okay lol
DAMN RITE... WERE MY BBY
We have the worst communication.
You got it,man. Have a great day!
Trying to plug things into the wall in the dark never goes well.
am i the only one working today?
Just a reminder that as there is no 420 area code, today holds no numerical significance whatsoever.
First complete day off since dec. 26th. Anyone up for fun? I like fun.
I hate hearing her ugly ass voice. Why couldn't I be wolverine..lord knows I'd slice her guts out...ugh
Just painted a wall I am the wall painter, painter of walls.
Roland Smith: use THEIR language 2 get through 2 leaders abt getting better at leadership (ex: tell CFO u want 2 run a diagnostic)
I'M SO STOKED TO SEE MY BOFRIEND TOMORROW WHO IS BETTER THAN ANY OF YOU. <3
Up since 6am cleaning house. Lots to get off my mind.
I'm leaving at like 2 on Wednesday.
If you are superstitious tomorrow is Friday the 13th. Get your equipment fixed today!
Slam dunk contest is just the rap game now. WACK
I know. Just thought I'd pass that along 4 those of the male-appreciating persuasion. Your #atheism makes U hotter, 2.
You and me nothing together
So tired but want today to go quick so I can go fishin with Mikey! :)
I really wanna go to Haiti. What countries you wanna visit?
Getting off twitter because I'm so bored and there's no one to talk to so bye
omg its rainning.
Nobody is taking the bait with my taunts. They must have spec'd in taunt resistance. (anyone who gets that joke is a nerd)
That awkward moment when someone gets mad at you and you just can't seem to care
can i buy tickets and if so where? Thx :)
lol is this a convo we need to have on twitter lol
Cant find a status that matches my mood at this very moment.
Definitely one of my favorite things to do.
My juice spilled..
game is less than 30 min. away!!
he did.
K I'm locking you in now, I'm going to text you so that you can do the same
Congrats Colin!! RT : Excited to say I'll soon be joining Team , though I'll miss the awesome folks at !
Solid night of deck making, burrito eating, and dog walking. Nice work
#NP--birds take a bath--Future
Yay! Jean Dujardin won best actor
thats wassup, what do you have in the pipeline currently that may need some assistance?
Question of interest: Would you order more burgers if you could order online or through your phone and then just pick it up? Thoughts?
In darts, what constitutes as a "hat-trick"?
All intelligent thoughts have already been thought; what is necessary is only to try to think them again
You know you're a band geek when you use how happy you are by a scale of 0-updated prelims score.
Curious about your thoughts: What #golf item would you be excited to receive this holiday season?
just barely caught the 21. On my way!
Google music becomes "Google Play".. call it what you want it's still my music service of choice. if you = android, get acquainted.
So are you launched now??? Weekly photo contest looks fab.
You're very observant!(:
You guys are nasty .. I can hear you from this room .. #NastyA/F
oh well he can :P HI CHRIS'S DAD XD lol i love you christopher :) your my everything :)
that's two raven players we picked up for defense
's trustees have voted to sell Tell why you think this is a bad idea.
If this heifer don't txt me back.. M. Gunna be some serious problems!
Final step before becoming a Jedi? Standardized multiple choice test.
birchbox, where are you? birchbox birchbox men, can't wait to see you!! :) So excited to see what's in the first Birchbox for men!
most frustrating thing about my "job"? listening to the MILLIONS of excuses why somebody CAN'T go to school...excuses are like..right? >=/
lol "are you missing zach?)" - dad "...no, is just playing basketball so I'm bored." me lololol.
Educational technology is mostly tokenism, a way of saying "hey we're modern, too." - Alan Kay
Been less active on the twitterz lately because I'm booking lots and lots of gigs. Be back soon - promise!
Sticks and stones and weed and bones.
i get annoyed easily
haha im assistant..nothing fake here.
if they hate on Justin they were NEVER beliebers!
1 black man vs. 20 men in black. #spoilleralert. The caps won in OT.
I'm sure it's a hit.
hi naddem this is Amirand iam from Hebron. I do work on the same Dev team. you are doing a good job though.
HELL YEAH!!!! TEX WITH THE RUN HOME RUN!!! 2-0 LEAD!
Creativity isn't something to be ignored. Ignoring your creativity is ignoring your authentic self. And you REALLY don't want to do that...
WRESTLE MANIA IN AN HOUR CANT WAIT TILL JOHN CENA BEATS THE ROCK..I STILL LUV THE ROCK BUTT HE HAS GOTTEN MEAN!!
Spend my whole life puttin on, you spend your whole life puttin up.
[piano bar music] “gh, i”
motherfuckers wanna find me.
LA was never my plan, but I'll go where the opportunity takes me.
Central Park is full of wondrous things, like a zoo and stuff. East Village/ near NYU also fun for walking around
i fucking hate when kids comment my status thinking they're god or some shit. what the fuck
I DON'T GET IT, fat ugly girl, skinny alright guy, CUTE as baby, like WHAAT !
The thing is, I don't mind pants. It's the oppressiveness of socks that I detest.
Avoid the hecklers
Watcha know about half off 97
A question for NOLA #sla2010 attendees, particularly What is the price of a Kamikaze shot at Lafitte's?
#html5 semantics useful for blogs but not so much for say portfolios (ie, no articles per se)? Seeing shifty use of aside, nav, section...
I truly want to trip anyone who finds it necessary to run down Carson street.
everybody has something to shout about just let go before it brings you down - :) great song! Give it a listen!!!
Madz got picked up early. I don't have her tomorrow. :)
they recently had lapchang... in a dessert round. wait, mashing chicken feet?
Bored as hell need some new ppl to tlk to
At Costco again ugghhh
Ya I was taking pulls of benefits till like 4a.m from what I am told, but I remeber nothing after about 2p.m.
12,373,445 passengers hopped on ABQ RIDE during 2011. Each one of them saw Interior Ads. Ask me about reaching these people.
Yes indeed! You going on Friday?
Omg me too ! :p i'm so sleepy :O << yawn hehe :P
Hanging out with , , , and at ! Indy wedding ideas!
"My favorite thing about the United States? Lots of Americans, one America." ~Val Saintsbury
Working today in Madison, WI with Troy Reeves, director of the OH program at UW-Madison on Oral History in the Digital Age best practices
If we are not supposed to eat animals, why are they made of meat?
Instruction does not prevent wasted time or mistakes; and mistakes themselves are often the best teachers of all.-- James Anthony Froude
Going to the Bruins game tonight? Stop in for dinner and drinks before or after! GO BRUINS
O WOW THIS TRACK IS TIGHT!!!! I love it! do u have the lyrics to it written out
Not sure if the mechanism is NFC, but the door does open upon waving the key near the sensor.
Haha I have to go die in a hole!
come to ireland? Hah then we can hang! Lol
“: Marcus Denmon is a killer🏀” Where is he from. That's all we put out is killers.
congrats guys!!
well, duh.
World Of Warcraft, Fanta Stick Baby.
In e-mail, says they are closing, effective immediately.
Gonna cry all day lol fuck you all
It's just brutal to watch the Grizzlies play like this. The turnovers, the bad passes, the dumb fouls. We're beating ourselves.
To get what you want, design a business that gives a large number of people what they want.
Some folks are commenting about Tiger's mom's demeanor during his televised statement.
I love it, too! In fact, I really need to schedule an appointment! :)
#ImpracticalJokers Funny shit I can't stop laughing #MyStomachHurts it's gonna be a funny night
Thanks for the reTweet!!
God I'm tired. I wish I didn't have to work tomorrow.
SHOwer Time!! :P
Its god. You know how brooklyn go lol hows georgia ?
lmao u wild cuzzo...im at the office watching movies and shit
I'm your biggest fan!
Pay no attention to those who say it can't be done. That's just their opinion, not your reality.
That annoying couple who decided to show the world over Facebook and twitter how much they love each other.
Thats what i said lol RT My fingers are too fat for Draw Something.. :(
"For example, let's say the Patriots win by 35, with Brady finishing 34-for-35 for 450 yards and 6 TDs." no too far off, billy
Hey there stranger! How and where have you been?! If you get a chance also check out !
Thanks for listing me in 2011 Women Who Move the City issue!
I think is the best
Wishing can only keep you alive for moments, but having your wish comes true keeps you alive forever.
Yeah Tim Tebow created the Rhodesian Ridgeback because they're both from South Africa and all
with your skinny self? Cover up those legs brother before you scare somebody. #irenehaseffectedyourmind :-)
Don't forget! We're running our LIKE ME LOTTERY! Be our 725th 740th and 800th like and recieve a FREE copy of our EP!!!
i always follow ppl back #teamfollowback :)
This picture is an overwhelming display of facial expressions :-)
Right? Color us flattered. =D
CNNheroes What a touching program &the stuff I'd like to include on my all positive story news network. So Much 2b Thankful 4. Report that!
dad got a twitter??? hes such a nerd
Thank you Nora Rupert from the Broward County School Board for attending the JFG I&I Ceremony High School on Tuesday night.
in first grade, i remember that I was Blue from Foster's Home of Imaginary Friends! i freakin' loved that show..
why did they bring the charlie angels show back with the same type of flow - three female angels. men can be agels too.
Congrats! You all are the best!! Can not wait to visit.
thanks Gee! Glad you like them!
WAIT....are you selling your tickets or??
actually marriage is really common in this generation, divorce is too. old people are old fashioned and are afraid of divorce.
SONGS TOO
You are too nice!! Thanks lovely sister 💗
Wow, crazy comeback for the Clips.
Watching #DanceMoms best show ever!
Concussion chops? Anyone?...
That would be decent!!
Aww that sounds like fun!! :D Who are you going to dress up as? :)
$BZRT - OTC Pink is
I missed being able to wear a tank top ♥ :)
THIS SONG IS SO AMAZING I LOVE IT! RELEASE THIS ON ITUNES ALREADY AUSTIN!
"You can't rename your dog! That dog is going to have an identity crisis."- Ma mere after learning Tim Tebow renamed his dog
Shut up shut up shut up. Omfg
Home alone so imma plug my iPod to my speakers and take a shower lol
The University of California, Santa Barbara&#39;s independent, student-run newspaper.
anyone with nekoosa/Lancaster updates?
Congrats!!!! That's awesome :)
"Look, Grandpa sent me an Amish tweet!" -- that's referring to getting a letter in the mail. He's on a roll!
just joined the world of twitter :)
Hey Monday, I fucking love you mate
BREAKING: William Cannon closed between Westgate and Brodie.
“: #Aquarius is a free spirit who values independence.”true !
Thanks. Not much different from other name generators -- no lateral, associative thinking, just word blends.
If She Go To Chicago I Will Be There!!!
No one can qualify or disqualify you based on what you tell them over the phone, only a healthcare provider has that authority in person!
I was assigned someone to kill so I have to kill them. Someone is on the prowl for me right now too!
Ethnic World Pageants is accepting delegates for the 2012 Pageant and we are accepting applications for state and country directors.
oard...i been working on music fareal...what day is it?
slander is wrong
Definitely. We don't need to squat on their land just for the Lithium and Heroin. American lives aren't worth it
Ugh fuck this
I mean it, if i meet justin bieber, my life is going to be made <3
": Don't feel so bad about that loss, Blazer fans. Warriors lead the Lakers by 15 in the 4th."
WBA did a survey of communicators, and results say they are much more optimistic than the general public.
obvious...but impossible...sad state of affairs
Has to be Altuve with Lowrie a close 2nd. Wandy has been great too.
#askaubrey Random Question: What's ur favorite perfume? Looking for a new scent & like some options. Gotta mix it up :)
going to be hard when others team would pay to get in plus sacrifice other kids like in the hunger games
con't Communication and listening are also important
Remember, remember The Fifth of November, when #OccupyAtlanta takes back Troy Davis Park.
Global midterm was fairly easy..2 math tests today..fun fun fun :/
It's only Monday...
Okay so, for the first paragraph, talk about like a connection to your toy or like an intro to it
on election day, 10,000 recall signatures collected by 600 volunteers in 13 hours - 13 signatures / minute
About to go tho my lil sis volleyball game hope they win everybody wish her luck
Check out American Businessperson is an educational talk show featuring guests nationwide and Promotes American Dreams.
It’s Prix Fixe Tuesday! Enjoy a 3-course dinner for just $18.95 per guest! How can you pass that up?!
coriander oil a great way to kill bacteria & more!
some fucking junkie stole my bike right off the front of the motherfucking bus
Nearly every #brewers player is underachieving thus far. Most concerned with Axford, Ramirez, Braun, in that order.
RT iF you love justin bieber!!!!!!!
U said Obama's theology is "...phony.... Not...based on the Bible." That's what #evangelicals u r courting say about ur faith.
Man my uncle is funny as hell man
Before speaking, take a breath. Ask yourself, "Is it worth it?" - Marshall Goldsmith
You are too too kind (blushing!!) Thanks!
Are you coming to MoCCA, or you just want someone to distro for you?
"I oughta come down there and kick you right in your c#%t!" RT : your a filthy women!
hi we saw your tweet re: CITP We're looking for partners for a new innovation network. Any suggestions?
It's follow friday, my good man! When you tell people who they should be following!
always cheers me up (:
Thanks! I love your town. I spent a couple weeks there in '09 training for Ironman Canada. Beautiful!
Church then hanging out with :)
Where were all you heat fans at last night tho?
Good to hear! I'm addicted to journals, art supplies, etc. The possibilities are so delicious :)
I'm all for in LA but I'd rather have a Winter Classic where there's a chance of snow.
Last Friday Night<3(; i love you girl thnks for being there for mee Crackheaddd Aunt(: #HarryPotterNerd(: #Ploop(:
Washington County Sheriff investigating shooting death in Lake Elmo. Body found in driveway. Neighbors reported shot or shots.
dude somebodies acct got hacked or somebody was feeling the whiskey last night :)
Awww there's doing behind the music Aaliyah
Thanks for the opportunity!
Question #1: What famous tennis player is from Pasco County?
3AM is on the radio right now. I can't wait for the new album to come out!!"
josh scaring me talking bout I ain't gone be able to get em
RT : Images should have meaningful alt text. Use thoughtful microcopy.
The 2010 NFL season concludes Sunday night at Cowboys Stadium when the Pittsburgh Steelers meet the Green Bay Packers in Super Bowl XLV.
I'll stick with club soda. It's closer to booze.
Prom was fun now boat cruise 
You will have to go out and shop for the latest trends in the clothing industry and then sell them in your own boutique
It's still yesterday here!!! So! Sanghiljukahamnida!!!!
TAKE A BOW TWITTER AND GOOGLE!!.......BRAVO!!
suggestion: set up agreement w/ stores that machines are in to hold the DVDs if machine is full.
Check out our youtube channel!!!! The Band Camp vids rule!!! www.youtube.com/mistakesweremadevids
I cant wait til Peyton plays some games for us. I'm tired of looking at Indianapolis Colts highlights, to get my Peyton fix smfh
As long as you don't drive like a Kennedy. Am I right? Ha!
Ok so can they let us off already
I'm still slightly shocked at how much of a scumbag John Edwards is.
"My Boys" is a TV show on TBS, silly!
Think I'm going to come back on twitter again
Going to get burnt again today!
i have not been sick in years... why on this beautiful day do i have to be stuck inside :(
RIP Donna Summer. I grew up on your music
I don't care why you're leaving- you'll miss me when you go.
thank you for your advice talk to ya 2mmarrow
OMG!! wow that must suck!
Give existing bloggers <3 while recruiting next great blogger in the pipeline #prsawebinar Good tip!
Platforms like , create marketplaces w/o gatekeepers. Education is headed that way. Charles Best at
i got family out there wat r u takin up
your welcome & please follow me back :)
RT : Farting in Sephora creates a smell more puzzling than any other.
The Show is on Saturday, April 21st, 2012 @ 7:00 p.m. Jennison Field House!!!! All 9 divine Stomp the Yard We Finish!!! LEt's GO!!!!!
okay my Love i'm looking forward to talk with u again!! U can ask me whatever you want to know about my life :) Bye xoxo
fort greene park bright and early familyshow 10am:: wed
will be there and is joining us as well :-))
Hate to do this, Team LB - need to push you guys to Wednesday 12 p.m. Thanks. We'll hit 'em hard tomorrow!
Today one friend said he appreciated my soul+spirit, then an hour later I was told I was mean+unsupportive. Let's see what tomorrow brings.
I expect the favor returned... Lol
But seriously why do I live in the US. I want to live in England. Or Canada, but still
My rooting for a baseball team is often enough to doom them to failure
It is a waste of your energy to worry about what if. Life is for the living. ~Paul V Harris
TONIGHT!! on the Emcee Eternia goes on the record about her latest project "At Last" and why women are needed in hip-hop
i'm a triple threat
i have but its not ur fault an u no i likeu aloy
If you bored hit me up ! We can talk about anything
Aww She Said Some Shit Lml, I Might Second Guess It "Its In Human Nature I Suppose, Second Guessing"
free admission this wed/thur @ surrender night club just use my name @ the guestlist ( Travis sosa) only LAdies c u there
NO I didn't ! Anyways when are you leaving
lol is that good? 😳
hey girl!
EAST BOUND AND DOWN! #KennyPowers!
the weeknd plays in ATL tonight.
#betoorourke tells of a time he stood in the Mexican national line coming into #ElPaso for an unreasonable amt of time.
Facts Bout SpongeBob:it actually makes u stupid after watchin' it. Prove:the ppl from the nickeloden production wrote an article:))
"when you think Tim McGraw, I hope you think my favourite song, the one we danced to all night long, the moon like a spotlight on the lake"
I just saw you guys left Bamako for KC. So glad you are all safe & well. xoxo
I think I would be Counselor Troi. She best approximates the tone I have to adopt during Tense Moments in the Arts.
Congrats on the expansion! Ground breaking 11 a.m.
9AM, 80 degrees & sunny, spent time with my Savior, walked on beach, took a swim in pool, working in board shorts & flip flops..GOD IS GOOD!
Was in a car accident yesterday.. ehh I'm fine but totalled the side of the car.. shows how good god is. He is very good.
haha I bet but what r u doing for break?
laying in your own bed is the best feeling ever.
Thank you, dear! You are most certainly not alone :)
that's funny!
Going to visit Mom today. I hope the rain holds off until tonight
I just had some tacos. You were thought of.
Spring break can not come quick enough!
People who blare music at the gas pump are among my least favorite.
#suicide "a permanent solution to a temporary problem..."
Graduating is so tight butthole
Haha #runnerproblems RT : “: you have exposed my first ever bloody nipple” that is great
I have the lovvvliest piece of feta cheese waiting to be used in zucchini pancakes.
at least you didn't almost die by peanut butter like I did that one time. And the power didn't go out here, weird since yo ...
I think it's that you have to do it manually. A good system would figure out that you're reading v. skimming/skipping.
You might have ruined my past, screwed up my present. But there's no way you're going to touch my future.
follow me please 2
prank gone bad...
#iug2012 views into the database allow local reports to keep working even when the underlying tables are changed. Good stuff.
The apocalypse must be upon us, not only have I caught myself watching football today I also yelled at the Vikings.
I have a vertical of that from 08-11. Such an awesome beer.
you better ;) !
Did it this morning. My dog was not impressed.
Be sure to tap on this topic. I'm taking a course from her: Teaching Online. An absolutely brilliant course.
congrats on sticking to your goals! Not many of us can.
#fangirl he called me interesting <3 <3 <3 (i'm taking it as a compliment)
you're so blessed to be doing all this traveling! My job is sending me to London for a weekend in July. But you got it made!
Is Doing our monthly Loft show Mon Mar 5th. 1030pm. Free.
I think my job is giving me panic attacks.
First lecture of #SCAA2012 - One Year Later: Hunger in the Coffeelands - How Can We Help?
ok:/but I want to help them so bad cuz I hate seeing people fight
Yes I did. But I can, I'm not a Cubs fan flaunting myself on Fox 6 News. Lol
Top 3 in :30 coming up shortly
Lo siento, a mi me gustan los hombres, no la mierda.---- ha ha ha 😄
nothing like changing a car battery on a cold as day.
Well you seem to be obsessed with her to a great extent. You look up her name and defend her like some creep.
-- He's having a great season ... but he's not an absolute necessity uniless you have Joe Nathan.
also what is that oldest picture haha!
Run, run, run, run. It's time to run.
I'd rather the death threat.
hey.....which type of training?
thanks loads!!‹33
#Entrepreneurs: Join mosaicHUB by tomorrow at 11pm EST and you'll be entered to win an iPod shuffle or a $50 American Express gift card!
#DivaTweet :b : About to put on my eye mask and crash out!
ewwwww. Deep fried bagel? Really?
Can't Fell My Legs D: But Imma Keep Working Out ... Lmao
At Bailey's having a good time with compadres. heading back to Texas tomorrow, awesome dude!
Be careful when telling someone everything will be ok. The truth is, sometimes, everything will not be ok.
Shin to the Face!!! Way 2Go !!!! Awesome KO!
#EveryTwitterTimeline has that one person who, for one reason or another, just really shouldn't be on Twitter...like really.
me too!!! Thanks for making the 12 hour trip ;)
hope u have fun at prom mines is in 2 weeks I can't wait :)
It smells like a zoo in the boys bathroom
Its something about Denzel Washington..idk what it is but I like it
Nothing like that euphoric feeling of blasting Gangsta's Paradise on the drive to work on
is Cincinnati that bad?
need me to come counsel her? Then we can have some fun after ;)
i'm very.. very.. very short(x so we'd look like the most fucked up couple or whatever! xD
Even better!
Justin Bieber's Post-'Fantasy Factory' MTV Cameos: A Wish List
I want to swap all the bright things!
If only Ghost Rider glitter bombed Santorum in the movie.
Right back at you!
Awe, we’re blushing! :) RT: Sunbelt granola bars are the best. NO JOKE.
I'm disgusted at everyone throwing cuse under the bus. Especially from SU students. Stick behind your fucking school it's not over yet
It is clear that they struggle to remain apolitical and simply focus on reforms that amplify the voice of the people, e.g. CFR
Well done #Bulls! Way to wear em out- we're proud you're representing the Chi!
Facebook Pushes Mobile - RedOrbit
mid-googling 4 "is the better part of", autofill recommends "is the better part of valor". love it.
Students want everything they need in their courses behind a "single door". Integrate all software/sites in LMS.
omg i can't keep up!! You take too many pictures
And I love u back sis!!!
Need some logo work done in the next few weeks. Anyone interested or recommendations? @ or DM thanks!
As a welfare program representing a population without an adequate political voice, Medicaid will always be underfunded.
Here's the first work week of 2011. I hope everyone has a great week. While you're at it, finish the night off at some great places to eat.
It's Thursday, which is "Friday Eve" in Optimisian.
well put!
#fridayreads Grave Mercy by RL LaFevers, Ismae escapes a brutal life to join a dangerous new life of service.
tin lizzie bball watching
The brainwashing has begun!
I just learned that Harrah's & WSOP take $1350 out of the prize pool for "vouchers" for the top 27 finishers. WTF!?
In Houston, invited to judge at #rbpc Rice Business Plan competition, anyone else here?
Looking for Mentors for an elementary age students---have lunch w/ 1x week, 30 min. time slot between 11-12:30 E.Austin
and also looks like a jackwagon
Someone needs to give me their INSANITY dvds.. I need to get in shape quick :/
yeah but I look good when I wear it with my pen protector
By creating & overlays in your videos you will gain more clicks!
Need performance, reliability, and scalability for your legacy apps? We can solve your problems.
what's good boo
u from maryland cause i am
It's finally here! Tonight is the first ever Sideshow!
The only reason this woman isn't a legend is because she doesn't realize she is one already. #FollowFriday (via )
I am so glad that I am not the only one! #libraryschool solidarity
My sister scared of my driving
with and both out of the office today, I CAN DO WHATEVER I WANT
always something new with the dog
Hi Robyn! Look forward to it! :)
cause ur slacking!!
I feel like I need one more NYC adventure before I move next week...don't know what it is yet. Ideas?
Victoria's Secret Swim or Beach Bunny do you need a fresh bathing suit idea? #IHaveAnIdea! that is explosive. Peops will want your suit 1612
Thanks for following us ! We offer our services throughout the San Diego restaurant industry ! 858-486-4070
I knew you weren't a man.
Work stuff... LOL... Everything is good, just time to make that money!
55k at 150/300/25 missing online poker a bit right now
I just ain't have finals today. But that's a good ass walk bro
Today Was So Pretty ^.^ I LOVE THE SUN <3
The ONLY thing we all have in common is our butt hole ._.
you could apply to Puckett's Pond, we're always looking for more writers.
I cared about what you have to say.
Happy Birthday, biatch!!
Your spam re #UBTech is going to get you unfollowed. Tone it down please
i hav skool today D: i get friday off
ii saw your mom yesterday I miss seeing you all.
oh wait fuck SWAG
Thanks brot sometines we need to hear that
I knew Brandon I think as a passer by but not too much... Cool guy from what I remember though
Okk I will give the heats sum props for winning but why everybody shittin on the knicks tho...
Oh you know, just danced for six hours tonight. Nbd. Woo
Break To-Do Item #3: Step away from desk. Sharpen the Saw.
Your favorite *gadget* blog, I should say.
Hahahahah random as fuck. - "Here's a joke, why did the plane crash?" / "no idea." / "because the pilot was a loaf of bread."
Wish I had my laptop wit me but I gotta wait till tomorrow evening
Bahahaha buzz light year is my homie
: You too! Hope to see you soon! :)
Hello Professor! Awesome! Thanks so much! Jst got Lasik done Yesterday. Still out of focus! LOL! :)
My stepmom can piss me off so much sometimes
Happy Birthday, cousin Tony! :D
please give me tickets to Bon Iver - THANK YOU ;)
Pesky calves r expressing their displeasure by twitch twitch twitching. Shut up u 2 & get back 2 work!
you're missing out, sir!
plus, i'm really proud of Austin. he came along way since last year and #SaySomethin is just amazing. i love you, k?
I got Practice tomorrow wish me luck and hope i dont break my bones like i almost did today ... im still in pain ... "OUCH"
NYC, As I reflect a broader humanity through art I feel the impact it may be the elderly, youth, peers it can be beautifully extensive.
I really enjoy when I plug my iPhone in and it says it needs to be restored...? No, I didn't choose to restore it.
Lmao Me Too..I'm READY lol
Same to you buddy!
I look for someone who is nice to me. Someone who will like me, and I can be myself around. Not someone I'm not:)
thanks! That validated my decision to blow off Hunter and take a post-posting nap.
So much anticipation. RT : let me know if that ball has gone through the hoop yet on Mercer's arm
": I love it here. Been here since I was 19. you are lucky with that wall they made on the beach it looks...
Memphis is looking good right now.
#followfollowfollow me on twitter
Simplicity is the best form of sophistication
Cutest Direction fan ever! <3 :') brings tears to my eyes <3
currently we are at ihop getting balloon animals
As usual, best conference sessions of the day (night!) at the hotel bar. Slagging. Bitching. Idea-erating.
Miltown Tickets is starting to grow, check out www.miltowntikets.com
Please tell me that someone else thought Nicki Minaj took WAY too long to walk over to get her award.
adorable shark vs sweet alligator
: well tell ya one thing, I didn't think ya could catch crabs down there but I did!
Glick's Tix is fully stocked
GODDAMN do I wish I was in Green Bay right now, GODDAMN!
Submit! Submit! Submit! Submit! Only a few days left!
My mom is so dramatic
Business doesn't want training; they want to increase the bottom line.
oh this is much more extensive than the CITI program. Much much more. #wherearethefaculty ?
Do you know who made that flow chart?
Another horrible call by the refs. No contact on that play.
skirts made from taffeta
RT : RT : David Harris #racialprofiling makes hit rates less effective, gets us less bad guys
can't talk to an ugly nigga wit swagg.. #NawPeriod.. you gotta be cute and have swagg too or else your
Having a coffee at the #mmaf2011and gearing up for a big day with and
Hey next time you have an opportunity to tour LaBahn please let me know. Would love to see the new digs!
You are the best! Be on the lookout for a little something from me in the mail!
Go follow this kid>>>
Hope no rain tomorrow I'm going to the game.
I need to shave big time
I was half expecting the rain... gahhh. Weather people have been wrong lately... they got it right today. I was unprepared. :( Soaked. :)
15 seconds later lunch is over!
If you were fortunate to receive a #FREE Fully-Inked shirt offer...u better get it to me; the free shirts are almost gone!
exactly 40 days are left then our super-party will start! #Berlin + .. MUSiC, MAKES ME, HIGH ;D
hit me back bro..
lookin' good, boo....keep it up!
happy mother's day!!!!
No worries! Pleased to make your acquaintance!
yeah I'll need a ghetto progress report.
Rummage sale'ing and house hunting in the rain today. Looking at ten houses - six to go!
huge wreck 71 hey SB around 85th st!! Steer clear
The Blazers came back and took down Memphis
much good without a wick!!! I was in this in high school…crossing my fingers I get to see the revival :)
They say the best things in life are free...well, so are the worst things ~
can't. Sorry. Planning on a Saturday matinee with the wife.
PickUpLine: Would you like to try an Australian kiss? It is just like a French kiss, but down under
Scalia asks if we have to enforce our immigration laws in a way that "pleases Mexico"
thinking about making a new twitter just so the hackings stop, will use this one to find out who to follow
you def down for rancid??
There is nothing more powerful in the world than a mind made up. Better make up your mind...
": What do AKAs want for their birthday?"<=Birken bag or some Christian Louboutins
you just made my night.
Netflix for libraries... anyone seen it in action?
Lol @ the Dolphins. Have fun. More people are worried about the blonde hes sitting next. She fine.
The CW6 anchor always reminds me of Ralph Mouth from Happy Days!
teaching people/ companies about government contracting
hell yea! TU beat duke for you and MSU beat bowling green st for us.
Is it wrong to wish this hospital had a bar in it ? I am not sure if even a full bottle of jäger could make this seat comfortable
But you'll still need a human to do the interpreting. I'd like to see a computer try to parse Lacan or Derrida.
Sick in bed! Great! This Is not good have to much too do.. Come on Theraflu work!!! 😷
Be a door opener for your students.
Star Wars Day?
I am so mad that you put and against each other! I love them both! This is gonna kill me!
Twitter is confusing me a little bit. Hm...
Kevin heart is a Mess lol <3
Thomas wish Happy Birthday for me shes my bestie ..
The only thing I care to get emails about is when someone tags me on a photo, cause, you know, that's just dangerous lol.
Brew Dr. Kombucha is ON SALE all month at Markets! Go stock up!
I really need to stop thinking too much, especially before I go to sleep.
You jealous? ;] A #socialmediaqueen would be nowhere without her
I was talking about the iPod touch 3G the PREVIOUS GENERATION
Reasonable Doubt Documentary
My bad () I had the incorrect end date 2010 for the files. This is fixed. Can you see the journal assignments now? Due Friday :)
Oh Yeah, That 1 Trig Problem....>.<
My excuse for sleeping in class: "Sorry, its tech week"
Damn pockets on e now, only my moms can have my last n she just took it lol
Starting today.
Good day to you! Thank you kindly for the RT. Have a great day. Raining here so a good day to sort photos.
The consciousness of loving and being loved brings a tenderness and richness to life that absolutely nothing else can bring.
YeY!! I wonder where we would get a IM5 top..... Probably have to get a pic of them printed on it!! :D
It's a beautiful day in Dallas to hang with my family & go see Chely Wright later tonight. I love lazy days.
a penny for your thoughts, a dollar for your dreams
I hate the feeling something bad is going to happen-ive felt it all day :(
I lost $14 that's what happened. Lol RT : what happen chris.
Based on standard lender guidelines, we’ll get you a good idea of what kind of terms & loan program you can expect to benefit most from.
Are you ready?? LVSK8 5 is tonight, lots of galleries, and art to see! Pop in and see us where it's cool, both temperature and people :)
This is what I love abt the 305: media is out of touch, someone says, because the cultural salad is always changing
Our website host is down.. Im working on getting the site back up asap. Sorry for the inconvenience.
Met and chatted with the new Leatherface from the new Leatherface 3D. #horrorflick Geek out!
You working tomorrow? My man needs a cut.
Stumbling around drunk like a real #uvabitch is what I'll be doing tonight, Idk about you!
yes, it's called
Lmao why! I love when she yells at him its the best!
2012 Grammys: Backstage & Audience Photos – Rihanna, Katy Perry, Lady Gaga, Paul McCartney, Stevie Wonder, Chris Brown, Lil Wayne and Mor
you cute
Tribute to today in the TCSFHQ room as we're playing "Smooth Operator" by Sade.
I got u bae
that's actually a good call because the difference between sugar free gummy bears and regular ones is a far greater difference
Torture, murder, cannibalism, sodomy, rape & devil worshiping. I'm truly a sick fuck writing a song about this @ 7 in the morning.
I'm having a scary headache. Wow. Unusual for me.
Kelly Ripa's new co-host should be Larry King or Jack Cafferty. Sorry it took me so long to tell you my opinion.
are you coming to NC?love listening to your blues on BBKing's Bluesville.
there is no problem saying more than once you gotta 2 show some love if u like lax
yeah summer, so I don't waste time while I'm down here lol
true but others can't xD
Sometimes you just gotta sit back and let the music take over ;] peaceful
Untangled my IP access issue. Good times.
RT : National Lampoon's Vacation is on VH1 Classic right now #goodtalkson #thisiscrazy >
Margaret Cho's family history on TV right now! Finding Your Roots on PBS.
Im so fucking done...i wanna be happy
Good morning! Going to wear my chachi momma's to school today!
oh ok il keep voting. When's the last day?
And I love all my haters them my m.f'n niggas <3
will be having a bignews release stay alert
Lee: If a community isn't valued as a good place to live, it's vulnerable to violence.
My cousin thinks it's weird that i think black guys are fiiiiiiiinnnneeeeeeeeeeeeee! XD
You are welcome!
Joe memory: his let's call it a DAY solo in 42nd Street. King of high school drama...funniest guy around...cuddliest too
We don't have ceramic tomorrow waahh (snokie voice)
Some stupid girl told me that she has never heard of Lil Wayne. TF. Liar.
"In my various relationships I've sought that sort of restoration that I cannot find." - girl on phone.
dyin to ask this quest the #dlist had a sound bite where u commented on matt millen when #lions gm as #espn fb analyst not ...
40W at Briley/Spence is a parking lot. appears to be a serious wreck.
~~ Thanks for the follow. :-)
RIP Steve Jobs! You were admirable!
It is National Volunteer Week! How will you volunteer your time this week or this year to celebrate volunteerism?
RT Im scared of thunder!!!//omg me too!!!
We are working with a new client thanks to the referral by Thanks Oona, coffee on us!
I think I need another lover like I need a hole in my head.
I'm faster than the speed of light travel.
i know how you feel!
Wow! Filling up for the summer already, but still have lots of open dates available! Its going to be a great summer!
Here for the kickoff of #know12 -- looking forward to the first keynote and meeting various tweeps in real life here.
Coffee has been used as a drink for over 7 centuries.
Gorgeous day in Denver!
i feel like there's a perpetual layer of dust on everything i own, including me, no matter how much i wash it off.
You have to say that. LOL
I've been getting my hair done for 3 hours now... Only 2 more to go... 😒😞😔
owww.....hum nice to meet u again
Complaining get you nowhere
People who ask for RTs. <<<
Does anyone know where I can adopt a hellhound?
I love Lloyd 🎧
Hosptial courtyard, wonderful surprise up in the trees... Can you spot it?
Doing the Friday dance. Only a bit of work between us and a gorgeous weekend!
So excited for today!!! On my way to see my boyfriend
This would be easier if I knew Spanish..I lowkey want to learn to speak it and French as well
Kudos to the bankrupt #Coyotes who have the rich #Blackhawks on brink of golf. Best series so far; every game has gone to OT.
i agree even though i am one
you're so funny.
how can I resched my flight? Phone # doesn't work & chat says they can't help. Flying bos to dca
Date night!
Thanks for the RT, Brett!
Sushi would be ideal right now.
Thanks for the follow. One of our team members is from Yarmouth: NS is beautiful!
Visuals for "The Ritual" coming soon...
Happy NFL Draft Day!!!
oh man. you'll be fine, just study your ass off! That's basically me and Algebra 2, haha. I'm pretty sure I'll fail, sigh.
#ThingsBetterThanBieber My DICK !!
You've done it again! Loving New Works! If u haven't seen it you still have another day!
After I get some new followers I'll do the random drawing for FREE LAP DANCES!
Next year new 360 on deck online
and honestly-yall are making good MUSIC-PERIOD. Later for the genres & labels---there's only TWO types of music: Good & bad
So weird that the Clips came back after Caron got hurt
Yeah? Giants apparel for the little ones?
Oomf is too freaky right now lol He gotta chill nobody wanna read all that
will do if computer co-operates! Most showers will taper near noon Friday..should be a dry break til near 8pm
Up and at em bright and early.. Scott David CD Workshop at today! Wish me luck! :)
The only.. FULL MOON... I'm going to see tonight, is mine flashing other Cars ;)
Happy #Cincodemayo! Asha Anderson (Elias) is back at the treehouse and teaching her Yoga Flow class today at 4pm in Midtown!
um, who is you doctor?
That's super! I keep getting requests for photos by people from places like the USDA. Sigh.
Shake off the slip brah! Great job!!!!!! #Rays!!!!
Durant is that man
Lisa can you please follow me
Hunting down ghost towns in Arizona with my grandparents. So nice to be away for a few days!
At least I'm housebroken.
Sunday night and I just brewed a pot of coffee. The week is looking a lot like Mt. Everest to me.
I agree!! " Joshua Ledet is totally great.He should have made the fiinal 2
Happiness is unwinding before bed via reading or gaming on the iPad. Best purchase ever. Seriously.
hahaa your mom does not know you then!!
So my mom is making carmel now. Wonder what's next....
What color u wearin
I've signed up for EVERY freebie with the vendors at iasl. I oughta win something!
come on lads for tommorow
8-bit port (some spoilers): "You've unlocked Heisenberg!"
Leave the $$ to and estate and have a grape changed to your name!
me too!
Dude, WTF. No love for Portland, OR? That's like, your demographic. Bunch of culture nerds here.
yeah same here u must be in NEBRASKA rock on buddy!!!!!
I'm following
your life is SO hard
thanks Tammy, awesome :)))
Are you mad?
Great stuff on CommunityConnect and library/community data from
mentally preparing for capstone...
my MBP is so bi-polar... somedays it crushes large uploads, other days, not so much...
Free coffee today at Bruegger's to benefit Children's Hospital. Worthwhile reason for caffeine consumption. RT
Don’t forget to adDRESS your Heart @ Girly Girl Wines on Thursday! $20 for all kinds of fun! 20% of sales benefits
Sir, doesn't 8am seem a little early for that pretzel wrapped hot dog?
Only 38 more days to Hope for Firefighters XV, Hope to see you all there
why was your flight so long?
wow i hate me
Oh man, the amount of my life I wasted playing that game (at the arcade). It was the best, though.
Thank You Chriss! Always enjoy hanging with you. We don't see you often enough.
I forgot: Where online do you watch episodes of Suits?
So, what's new from the agent interest? Or too soon to ask?
horrible name, horrible band, horrible everything
that sucks so what are we gonna do
Never picking 8am classes , this traffic is a fucking pain in the ass!
Likewise! So great to meet you and learn more of your story. An exciting time for you and Filament. My best & lets stay in touch!
This weather is killing me! It def doesn't feel like summer with this rainy, cold weather
...about the amount of time most golden retrievers need to imprint on a person, innit?
I'm sure glad i met the dudes of when they were in The Thirty! #dirty #goodlistens Come see them play tonight at The Link! :)
Spring Break! Hope everyone enjoys the week off!
I just tol ny cousin Mike I'm tired he said "well my solution is to go to sleep. Works everytime." idiot...
New Portland radio station... 1059thebrew.com
Flat tire on our way to prom. Just great!
I hope its not what i think it is...
Flamenco Recital on December 4th! Solo Flamencos - sign up in the Studio this weekend!
Surely that's a joke review. Surely …
Ready for this Lakers game to come on.
This cookout bonfire is making me so happy right now
This is your final day to vote for the glove! Text reads to 86132! TUTORS/STUDENTS you have two weeks to return nominations for sept event!
I mean they are wlw but still... where's the p.o.c. love?
"You don't lose Friends. You just realize who your Real Friends are."
Threw a touchdown pass in flag football today : ) yay! Now all I need is to catch an interception!
Yesterday, Don Norman named the "that's not viable" job I said I wanted years ago to connect research & practice. Thanks Don!
Wikipedia is like a transparent Britanica
Great trick shot from Colby Lewis today. Check it out via Facebook Will Robertson or Derrio Green
Second day for vball !
Someone tweet me
“Successful people do all the things unsuccessful people don't want to do.”― John Paul DeJoria
so you're telling me you have never done something so stupid once in your 23 years?
She send me alotta pic's
Welcome and good luck at our Job fair!
I dont know why cant you?? haha
should tutor me in algebra. lol im horrible at it
Went to the bathroom
its actually mind blowing how relevant horoscopes can be
CHRIS BROWN FOLLOW NICK MARA <333333
Just read about the new CEO - Anna Maria Chavez in the USA ! Great story!
Between personal and business, I have over 600 passwords to manage. password manager ROCKS!
The American people are slow to wrath, but when their wrath is once kindled it burns like a consuming flame.-Theodore Roosevelt
very well thanks. Designing some excellent new sports equipment for Loving the sunshine and the surf to. How're you?
Yoga was an amazing end to the week. I finally connected my arms for the first time in a very pretzel-like pose.
#OperationDarkFoxx is complete!! It is darker than i anticipated though, oh well :)
Mixel. Chop chop.
Always Be Positive. *trips down stairs* Man, I got down those stairs fast! (;
Free tickets to see Polyphonic Spree with First show in #MKE since the Haiti trip. Meh, why not?
you have! Not being constrained by the environment, having to make bad design decisions to accommodate the language? Magnificent!
I'm gonna sleep like a baby tonight (:
If you have a #Record collection for sale, we will buy it - e-mail or call +44 (0)1474 816043
tickets yay or nay
Mother, can you please hurry the fuck up.
With morgan pelts at cheer registeration..
love rise
Yes Happy Birthday to you!!!!!
fever pitch?
Any time! We can't wait until May 12 for the ! Counting down the days!
Watch your step on the stairs Candy used xtra PineSol
one of my favorite songs.. Know every word to it haha
Bad pitching, bad hitting, bad fielding and baserunning that leaves a wee bit to be desired...Giants look, in a word, awful so far
yea why
...and batting skills that make Ryan Theriot look like Ted Williams. Sure, the Cubs finished 35 games out but we LIKED IT!
Many of these same people ignore the fact that twitter is another community-building tool as well. IF you use it correctly, that is
Are you still wanting to go to Evansville then or...no? lol
I'd rather be in a relationship that's crazy, unpredictable & not exactly perfect because that way we'll never get bored.
its getting pretty old isn't it?
I totally agree re the poor choice of color for that car. Especially since it's worth £1.5 million. Stupid rich people.
you're amazing too missy! Love you so very much <3 :)
Saw it! Spoiler alert...... Nah I wouldn't do that.
i dislike 2chains .
im about to do the same
it's never a Jersey, it's personnel. We'll be fine.
just turned my tv on and our East Asian movie is on the exact part Warden skipped....what a coincident. SURPRISE.
I absolutely LOVE the lyrics to the chorus of Cry With You, but unfortunately it won't fit into a tweet...
UH OH! DIARRHEA!
fer sure! let me know which shows to go to (:
austin i totally understan how mch u love me i love u too ;) LOL
anyway how r u and hows evevything
It is easy to get to the top after you get through the crowd at the bottom .
Back at you!
Dance performance went good last night :-)
"I'll Have Another" the perfect horse name for a Cinco De Mayo Kentucky Derby winner.
I am seriously in throws of March Madness! Who else can't get enough John Phillip Souza? Down from 76 trombones to 16!
Rub it in! :-) Hope you're enjoying it!
That is what I'm doing this weekend. Heading down to Bong in Kenosha
How do I get one of 's WWvBD bracelets?
That song is what hip hop does best. Brings the voice of the people to the masses.
Yay! On that note, I'm outtie! Sleep good, when you get around to it. :-)
thanks for the follow. Have a good time tonight on !!
what's up
#20thingsAboutMe I'm in the hospital at the moment for dehydration again!!! Fml
4 in a row?
i think i have to convince my boyfriend that camping at firefly is a good idea.
"If I cant have you, no one can..." WTF only crazy people say that O.o
A new coalition for FOLLOW !!!
that looks great. Where is that?
you are not alone!
the last saved game file on my HDD is 3/6/12. It wants me to start a new game. I was 25 hrs in. Where did my saves go?
“People will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but people will never forget how you made them feel.” ~ Maya Angelou
yea I thought it was pretty brilliant
(and friends) -- hi!
Going up the stairs and going down the stairs going up the stairs and going down the stairs and going up the sideways stairs.
your birthday may be over, but ur still awesome to me...smiles
Are men spending almost as much as women on beauty products? Results of a new study coming up on the !
aw yea i forgot u came like at the last 10 minutes lol for some reason they were OD talkative. i seen u were getting tight
safe travels! Enjoy your family!
Rope, trunk space, ski mask , chloroform. It's Friday bitches.
go to Maria Maria... it's an amazing mexican place, Carlos Santana's restaurant. It's right downtown by 6th street.
Last Night <<<
RT I'll act my age when I'm 69
the next 6 people to follow will get followed by me and <---FOLLOW10
you have to hand it to President and the Slow jam with was superb
Not at school today. :)
- Itss OFFICIAL.........My Circle is Getnn Smaller. I Had too Eleminatee Some of thee SQUARES. Only Fcck W. Certain Amout Of People Now.
this is the worst leg of the Tour of California.
Same here. I just want to get there & then relax. But I guess I'm not "enjoying the journey" & sightseeing like an old fart.
#NMRealEstate Holidays make rates bounce around.
well that's good
RT IF YOU NEVER MET GEORGE WASHINGTON! AND YOU AINT MEETING HIM!...
who said anything about it dieing its always lives its culture.
Goodness my feet hurt
I think someone that can play the drums is ultra attractive!
I only know of this song because of Grizzly Bear
QUESTION? Whatever happend 2 Real Hip Hip? Mainstream Radio is trying to feed us "TRASH MUSIC" NO THANKS!
Did the refs tailgate b4 the game, or just retards?!!
At the game! Really hoping we can come back after halftime!
yes, they are very excited about the possibilities. also our UG should be contacting you soon. Look forward!
Hey our fav followers! Man have we been busy over here! Here's a #hottip try the Pud Thai at Mai Thai restaurant on Brady Street!
#ripamywinehouse u will be missed
oh come on, watching the figure skaters fall down is fun
Salt N Pepa's Push It ALWAYS reminds me of Grandma's Boy!!!! So should have threw up on Doris Roberts when I had the chance.
please tell me you did NOT get married!?!
Then the advanced womans sang an Irish song & my mind was focused on Niall for like 10 minutes (x
it seems like the only time we talk on twitter is about mr.c
Note to self: Official tag is
Samuel Foote~ He is not only dull himself but the cause of dullness in others.
On a brighter note....the moon is spectacular tonight!! Hello Mr. Moon...
united states!:)
Asap I need yo line..!!!
Just bought Blue Slide Park
oh, ha, well I've been retweeting everything!!!
Made it through Day 1 back from vacation. Just have to hold out until another vacation. I think I can, I think I can...
I like watching the early Degrassi's to see Drake when he was little.(:
Sleepover w my baby
Sometimes I tweet audio links on my laptop so I can click them my Ipad so I can stream them through my TV.
hey thanks!!
PICTURES, VIDEO: Four found dead in Glen Waverley home
I heard it was a video 60 min story, But I cannot find the clip?
Can't move
Oh me too when I get back
I agree. Onward!
RT : Kohut says poll shows R's "really getting disillusioned" about WH campaign; losing enthusiasm. bfast
My damn cousin tagging me in Facebook posts! Nigga
He who has a why 2 live can bear almost any how. ~ Friedrich Nietzsche
Hey #Milwaukee! Do YOUR part to reduce to emissions and be rewarded. Walk, ride your bike or take the bus to VIA and 20% off today.
it makes me soo happy that I'll finally be 21 :))
I like telling, as long as it's not on me.
I've been great! You?
Be an example of what loving yourself look like.
Its time to get up and rolling!
hahah this is great
sure thing man, and for the record it was
A #Bad Bitch no wat she wants..How she wants it...And never fall #Off...#StopHoe is fucking #LOST..Sick Flow beast mode..Ha!!!
Asking a selenator why they love Selena is like asking a Mother who is their favorite child. Extremely difficult to answer & explain.
You have to wonder why Americans...mourn more for the death of a pop star than those that defend us. Doesn't make a lot of sense.
i work there O_o
Good one :) All ideas are being thrown in the mix right now!
Idk put whatever you want to put
Getting ready for the 2011 in Seattle! Look for Our Promise x30 unit at SSERCA Booth #5107 along with ...
You don't have to call, its okay girl. Cause imma be alright tonight.
Mineral is seeking a UX/UI designer for a freelancer for iOS app & site design/production:
RIP drakey. We will miss you:/.
holy crap! i jumped a little when i saw that mug shot!
let's both share the pleasure then ;)
Happy birthday zayn Malik one more day! :D
Maybe you are to have a "Good Year"?
Happy Sunday!
Congratulations, Kelly - you're amazing! Love how you left it all out on the course today!
Now days niggas reach jus to sell they record...
Playing at Target on the furniture.
I wanna see! :)
Geek question-if u can help-just reloaded windows xp and all it does is loop when i try to log on. It never fully engages or starts. ugh
- There were no creme eggs with which to compare my spelling. Sorry dude.
I would say cool but its actually hot. I like it here, most things are bigger, that's not a myth & neither is southern hospitality.
YEAH!!!!! So glad you see it my way :) PS - did you see my convo about false lashes at the salon the other day on fb?
Wouldn't Mario Williams,ray rice & courtland finegan look good in a #packers uniform. They are all free agents.
Sounds yummy! Thanks!
Eczema fundraising walk just scratches surface for awareness - Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
I have more keychains than keys...
One-eyed Mike's with , germano, Fred Nachbaur and Where is ?
You know you're sick when the dinner you crave consists of chicken noodle soup and orange juice! Yummy! I wish I was at church!
Ten more days of school.
Wow this is wonderfully said and I know we forget this way too often as we get wrapped up in our own lives. thanks!
I'm reminded by #God that when I think life is hard, I'm struggling,or I can't make it, to remember what #Christ went through. Can't compare
“Flowers... are a proud assertion that a ray of beauty out values all the utilities of the world” - Ralph Waldo Emerson
I understand some people have it worse than me. 17-21 were the worst years of my life. No one has tried to find and fix me. I'm still lost.
And, I am as well...Thank you.
Wish I could tell my OkCupid prospects that asking to add me on FB gets them on the fast track to the friend zone.
really? Wow.
so disappointed in these CATS chants
Jose Oquendo for Hall of Fame!
I hate when girls talk about how they can't get a boyfriend. Do you realize how pathetic you sound?!
RT : Mm-hm. And I approve of eradicating Jews. || Then you are a hateful person, and beyond biology, person is not an accurate term.
I need to learn how to keep my eyes closed. Lmao
Haha yeah it's good for me because I don't mind spending like a minute or two per day downloading a random app.
Jeremy Lamb
Maybe 1/2 recognized it; 1/2 of those placed it; and another 1/2 connected the dots.
is a good friend and this was a fabulous article.
Stop paying for contractors. Hire gov employees with limited benefits or temporary for a fixed time.
There is a subtle but inescapable connection between the 'sacred' attitude and the acceptance of one's inmost self. ~ T Merton via
oh yeah
Krugman puts quotes around "centrist" to indicate he does not consider their centrist claims to be "accurate."
we got 2 RSVP's, both were no and we never heard from you. :(. Wanna go out and watch march madness with us?
No doubt bro.... I ain't got no choice!!
JEEbus, that is loud! Makes Monster Magnet look like Belle and sebastian!
Dear Grizz If u want to win u must contain Evans and get those rebounds!
great party tonight at the W! Thanks!
did you get a new number mister cause I haven't gotten a call lol
aww stomach flu? That's no good
At Heaven City with , planning next cocktail dinner.
I need to you tell some other people that ;) Hope to see you this weekend!
I guess I'm just going to stop, I feel stupid now. Ha,, damn..
Dear , I am going to block you. Okay, bye. (;
S/O to Kyrie Irving
I was ecstatic to find that I had $60 in my printing account... & now I'm sad because I'll probably spend it all on 1 print.
Susan Komen has had a VERY rough day on my facebook news feed.
Wats good ms
Bruins are unleashing the goals tonight (;
Admit it life is unfair, at least we have dreams!
I understand that to a point. is it unspoken that in that position you lose a sense of individualism?
man I was fuckin trippy last night dude!! Fell asleep at 8o clock after eating the restaurant that waas rallys,lol
He dares to be a fool, and that is the first step in the direction of wisdom. by~ James Huneker
: Please back online #poker. Licensed U.S.-based horse race wagering sites show sites can be regulated & age verified.
I feel like its christmas eve today or even better than that!
im in love with Noah!!! <3
9 am SESSION: How to Use Social Media & Earn Trust, Build Credibility" presented by Corey Perlman in Room B114
Ready to rock tonight at the mutiny.
Mentoring, fluid collaboration, face to face (in addition to online) community, serendipity, breaking silos - Lots of things Baltimore needs
Clippers win. Now off to spend the day with my wonderful mom for mothers day! -
This Mute I work with is prob the funniest person I've come across in sometime. I understand him more than most non grammar ass ppl.
deal. i'll count on it. so happy you're back
United Way was excited to sponsor and attend Virginia Garcia's Healthcare Symposium addressing the social determinants of health
CAUTION: while this WILL lessen your hangover, it will NOT lessen the amount of urination found within your bedsheets.
whats good w ya baby?
<-- Wow? Abortion and vasectomies are forms of contraception? Hm ... I'll have some of what they're smoking
When shit doesn't go my way, I tend to get very annoyed at the lack there of! lol.......My Grits are gettin overcooked <<<<
No sweat.
Never regret a day in your life, “good day gives you joy while bad day gives you experience
In the future, everyone will have an internet empire with 15 category-focussed websites.
we're gonna give it away to everyone to download.
who? rt - Really? Ben on The Bachelor=Ho-hum! We want a NEW cutie we cn get excited about! Sloppy seconds=boring!
I love when people take over MY special assignment and then act like I have nothing to do with it -______-
How's that for effect! One Om and provides us with an excellent resource! TY
Goodmorning to the world of the tweets tweet away and everyone have a safe day
“You can’t wait for inspiration, you have to go after it with a club.” — Jack London
Sweet and I've heard they are SUPER cute!
governor of Kentucky
you okay?
dang should have tweeted u earlier!!!!! Day or night?
That's a great band name.
tell her to meet Justin!!
Visited Multnomah Central branch today. Amazing children's area
you sound so good...thanks for adding great jazz to my New York visit this week!
. Help return Virginia to small government. Vote Republican
Hmm....I feel like I know but I don't wanna guess, I'm gonna try and be patient. Lol
Sometimes I just want to be a bitch to people. But I bite my tongue & play nice instead. (:
as a kid, i cant really remember a time when i didn't wanna be in love. now i'm scared of how much of myself i can give up in a relationship
Fire at school!!! Ah
All 5 locations are open tomorrow 8-12 for all your eyecare needs. Have a safe weekend!
it always makes me happy
Can you follow please?(: And way weren't you at the radio station? Would've made it 3x as better,No It would have made Perfect
thanks for da shout out..u seem really cool to..yea i follow u..but follow back plz:)
NO YOU DON'T, UGH! Lol x)
not until next week. I could always drive down. ;)
a little late getting that news. Everyone laugh't when I said I wanted to be a comedian. There not laughing Now. Amazing man
Hollywood, here I come.
Every woman on her knees looking up is not religious.
Don't make time for someone who won't make time for you.
I am in love with this song!!!! Ross did such an amazing job on it!!!!!!!
let's go out for a drink!
your delicious Valrhona chocolate chip cookies got the best of my willpower today.
Malik punk ass got that "thinking bout You" song in my head!
Thanks for the #Follow last week ! Sorry we've been MIA!
Who heard new single #BOYFRIEND and saw the video that video is messed up I'm no longer a Belieber and I'm in following him!:(
… apparently they confirm he cheated during exams.
shut the hell up no one be knowing wat u be talkin bout and I'm pretty sure no one care
you are correct :)
Some ppl.say the most ignorant stff smdh....
Tried 2nd time & tried to reduce rice vinegar/water/sugar mix a bit to no avail. Sure the measurements are correct? (2 of 2)
you know u pay more the longer you wait to pay it... Hahaha
Gay is okay
Rest in peace Dick Clark..Now there's nobody to bring the world into January 2013..This confirms the end of the world
saw ur reel..good stuff but use a diff. clip to start. When I first played it I was wondering is this Greg's reel or Grant's?
I'm sorry... I don't mess with the rain I'll be liking like curly sue out in these streets lol
RIP Daddy Yankee !
As soon as I put Twilight in the mail back to Netflix I knew I was going to have to buy it
When did putting make up on someone's face as if it were hair, become barbering? I don't see any barbers that paved the way doing it!
sounds awesome. Yea let me know what you think. Thanks.
Titletownfanatics is moving along at a steady pace
About to go talk to a recruiter for the Air Force...ah
that's one hell of a last name you got there =]
Not even close to the I knew when I first moved to SF. Food was blah all around & the new look is 100% tourist.
we smoke weed instead!
DIY FTW! If too ADD (negative frame) / intellectually curious (positive) to choose a major, now you don't have to
you eclipsed me there! with the Luna question!
This is gonna be an awesome weekend (: I can't wait to see him (:
Let's go Bubba...Nothing better than watching the Masters with a cigar-in-hand!
Attending Twitter 101 @ EDUCAUSE's #MARC12. Twitter is adaptable & widely used. Creates connections. Opportunity to deep dive into info.
yeah, he'll just have to face all those fake teams twice a year.
Daily Special, Wed 03/21/12 - Spaghetti w/ Italian marinara & lg meatball, served with garlic toast, salad, and choice of dressing. $6.09 RT
ThatAwkwardMomentWhen your bra shopping and a girl comes in with her guy and he pays no attention to her but checks you out the whole time:P
"mortgage company"??? LOL that is an interesting description for a loan sharking operation.
who needs more followers?
My dog cosmo is a freak. I got him a toy bear for christmas, now every chance he gets he's humping that bear lmbo!
It sucks that you're going through that crap.
Wed 11/9 Mark Towns bass, Skip Nallia piano, & Eric Charles vocal at Eddie V's WestAve (Houston) 7-11pm
I'm a Jesus Believer †
S/O PREZENT#WE HERE
I hate Luther Vandercross' music... with a passion. (Deal with it)
Enjoy your Thanksgiving holiday everyone.
soon my house well just hop away music is insane
Just stumbled across your blog. Good stuff!!!!
Excuse me, cleveland away; Baltimore at home Week 2 RT : Birds open at home vs Cleveland 9/9
Looking fwd to plenary with 's Angela Blackwell, Junious Williams and our own LaShawn Chatmon.
I Was Talking Bout In My LT
This is why disliking you is much easier.
Thank you Dorothy!
We, 3 street A high call down
#OTG #WEAREOTG #OTGLIFE Music is Apart of Life, Life should be apart of your music
unsubtle brag. Grats as usual though that sounds convenient
9 more days! Our energetic volunteers are ready! They will be wearing long sleeve yellow Adidas shirts so be sure to thank them!
DWD Secretary Reggie Newson says revised #wijobs figures more in line with other WI economic indicators
Okay, so I'm Back! I nwill be on more than I was before. But I feel like an old person because I Forgot how to use it! Help me?
I could get you a phone number later of ya need
Am I the only one that can't recognize what the hell half of these emojis are supposed to represent?
Heading to the airport to go home. Had a solid weekend. Raced two thirty lap races, came home with a 2nd and 3rd. Leaned a lot!
she's Gonna be a magician!
♥ Thanks for the follow. If you're looking to change your life like I was here is a free $50 gift ✈ {link--------------
in till 6 but I have someone who can help her if not i am in on Friday
Thank you! Glad that's straightened out. Moms make the world go 'round. ^LG
Negative, as of this afternoon he has a bicycle for pit lane :) I'm petitioning for a sidecar...but he's still
Its almost time for MARATHON.... One time a year we raise money to stay on air... So help us nd donate..... #46/46Marathon
Safe travels to you too. Hopefully a California tweeton soon.
The truth will set you free, but first it will piss you the f**k off.
Goin to sleep at 715 am.... great
don't you ever work kid???
Good news!! We have our #foodtruck coming out very soon!! We’ll keep you posted!!
Hey UNCSA, you're every bit as cool as I remembered! Thanks for hosting a crotchety mid-twenty-something like me. It was a lovely time.
The Met with hometown heroes Providence, let's do this damn thing!
will do! lol I have one too many events this summer that I need to look good for :)
Time lapse videos in Baltimore? Hit me up with ideas.
you welcome <3
Yes! He rocked it!
heck yes
Let us know if you are ever in #Seattle, we'll host you on a tour! :-)
can't wait for 7pm tonight for the U.S. Premier of the Costa Rican Environmental Films at the Costa Rican Embassy!
When Somebody Is Chewing Food With Their Mouth Open
different Jack, but...
Dolphins suck
which mean I can tweet more
I'm glad that people are beginning to take notice. Male survivors have been crying for help for decades.
Work may not have to happen today....
I wish I was as musically talented as Phillip Phillips
The things you say to me just makes my days <3
um no. No you don't.
Wait wth theres gonna be a cheers mom?
thanks. Eastview got me thinking and I remembered this store. I'm going to have to hem it though I think. I'm not 6 feet tall.
Poetry heavy Mark Doty speaking tomorrow on library-zoo collaboration.
I'm so hungry
your tweets are full of knowledge. Way to go.
Ring hella big, you'd think I won a super bowl...
Free period!
I'll take over asante Samuel any day.
sorry about that, this is our billing system software we can't change, you can login over https and change it once received
Began reading "In The Garden of Beasts" by Erik Larson. #edge-of-seat superb
dang. Our school just isn't entertaining these days.
Be better homie!
That is funny! And, true!
is the $25 for iTunes music match worth it? Would be nice to have iTunes library on all devices at all times.
Great point, Alex to look & to smell are different! I also love smelling Jasmine, Roses, & Lilacs... cone flowers are pretty too!
I hope that someday soon the majority of dover publications' books will be available for the kindle, surprised it isn't already the case
session done good one
Learning how Satan works helps us see why God wants us to use our faith and get the "EVEN THOUGH... I AM" attitude... Continued next tweet
Thank you to all of our followers! Please spread the word and feel free to add the logos of your favorite websites!
S/o makein hella moves S/o #HomeTeam and any other members I haven't mentioned
Portland voted No. 1 in skinny jeans per capita.
Thursday night is Braxton night!
"Clear alcohol is for rich women on diets." -Ron Swanson
Did both. They say Happy Mother's Day back to you!
YOU are awesome! how's your training going? is it a cakewalk by now? 😉
All packed up. Ready for day 1 of moving tomorrow. It's been a fun run at #clubWAL with now onto the next crib.
Lovin Zayn's new haircut! Totally suits him (:
so you say
Someday I will be special in someones eyes
#RT if you would help me out when i get my website up! i would love to see you post the url on your blogs, twitter, facebook! show love
Samsung unveils new Galaxy phone
you know you're awesome when you have more followers than tweets and you've only had 3 days of twitter (;
hell yea we really do
YES or NO: Colored jeans?
Rough night for the #bullsfam. #teambulls . Hope we come back strong, losing noah will hurt bad tho
Diller: #online video won't replace TV, but will provide another option for accessing content
Got that Adele One and Only on repeat!
This non-UK-er got 2 C some of your Masks show via posts on Instagram today. Sadly, these "trucks" didn't make the pics. ;)
follow me please i love you46567879
very much approve
Just posted exciting news on tonight. 2 things =] go check out the facebook page. so excited =]
#PayItFowardDay is about all people, from all walks of life giving to someone else and making a positive difference.
We offer a free market approach to success in the music industry!!
Thanks I really appreciate it! :)
You said it's always different though, now you're saying something else.
Is the president in town? There is a huge motorcade rolling at North Island in Coronado.
why haven't I seen it!? :(
Correction: Abyzov is Dep Chair of Russian #opengov group.
Gl bud shit on pokerkaiser for all of us.
Congratulations to the new Varsity, JV and Freshman Cheerleaders at Lamar!!
The one you want is usually the one you can't have!
tv guide site probably will say thanks
say hi to my niece Candice working the dinners
Awesome, Safe Travels!
was going to go tonight but just to cold for me. How is the concert?
even though last week's was better? (it was a good one though)
Great to hear! Yes, let's talk soon. C is having a wisdom tooth pulled 2morrow, but maybe Fri? Can't wait to catch up!
“: Love this! So true... RT : Euthanize whatever is holding you back” This is great!
Who do you want to see play Reverb Fest this year?
my birthday is in 10 days!!! #sweet16 🎉🎁🎈
#salidolopez this is y I <3 boxing! Uppercut!
you have good taste!
#Siri is awesome. I asked her how to hide a dead body and she showed me a reservoir on a map 43 miles outside of Atlanta! Smart gurl. Lol
>>>>>>> Finally....an attack on Obama...keep it there men...or drop out.
Another studio shoot today.. hopefully the sun will come back out tomorrow
Many great ideas go unexecuted, and many great executioners are without ideas. One without the other is worthless. – Tim Blixseth
all of us Odyssey people 'ruined' the floor of a brand new classroom. i think it's art.
thanks Travis!!!
of no
I love
Trying to teach my little brother how to do pilates :)
Hmm maybe I will!:) and NOO! I like doing nothing loll ^__^
Sitting down with a Mortgage Loan Officer. Nervous.
Thanks for the follow :D
Excellent mapping traces of his internet server requests; circuitous route between his mobile and the server he was next to
RT : I would love a good night call *hint hint*(;
Text me
Never been so excited watching Devils hockey than in that 1st period. I fist-pumped on the Elias goal. Zubrus absolutely FLYING.
Smoking a cig in the beautiful new England weather
reports on a Memphis Ignite user who suggested the successful #Memstorm hashtag we could try similar idea.
She is my blessing Morgan is my joy
Kotchman comes through with a big two out RBI single! 1-0 Tribe!
Hate it when I think I've sent tweets / DMs but they're really just stuck and unsent. See this mostly with the Twitter 2.1.1 OS X client.
Think ur passion. Speak ur passion. Live ur passion. Be ur passion.
Show getting stupid. Ashley is ridiculous
where a rose in bloom is like perfume...what ru doing there?
come to DC...seriously those trees around your house it's nuts to stay there. 30 pmh winds will knock those over.
#FOLLOW friends & 4 the latest from #IL08!
Hahaha the most ironic things happen to me
Bitch it's never too Late
me and my mother ate it..u kno wasn't in the mood to cook..
thanks for watching!
Black History program today at 11am. Come see "For Freedoms Sake" at Castle Clinton. Seating is limited so come early
I now have a twitter AP on my phone.
I know the next O's jersey I'm getting. Ed Reed.
I bought a big drum, to drum on.
Dumass RT : Sorry :/ RT : *IF YOU ILLITERATE ASS NIGGA!!!! RT : I wonder of Dani blackberry icy or poo
I need some weed in my system so I could eat. Lol
NSMutableArray's insertObject isn't invoking 'retain' on the object! or am I messing up that 1 line of code somehow...
Faith came just in time.... this rain is in the way!
I saw Dave's schedule for his band Slo-Clap on Regan's Facebook page. Start tonight or tomorrow for 4 days.
Hung this on my desk in college RT We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, therefore, is not an act, but a habit. –Aristotle
More than a decade later, I finally get the title "The Devil in Miss Urd" ...and I really must say, blissful ignorance was preferable.
Nice Fela Tribute Event with Jenifer Jones last night at new Parish in Oakland. Sleepy at work now but it was worth it!
Life A Bitch But...
thanks, R. kind of you to say so.
Huh. Filling out the FAFSA is so much easier than when I first did it 20 years ago. Took me less than 20 minutes. Yay technology!
Apparently, the equation states that "Productive day + drinks = smug, pretentious twitter feed."
good interview!
I'm almost always at evening screenings and usually for foreign and art house stuff rather than major releases
Been doing me so well that my baby daddy mad his biitch can't get like me
lol (: not that lucky
In the absence of the military there is no state.
With some planning and changes in driving patterns you can actually reduce your toll bills by 30% or more. I'm over 50%!
Love me some Jimmy Kimmel...and HE not only belongs at the Dinner, he should be running for President!
I'm gonna have to say just because they're one of my favorite bands of all time and yeah. :)
waiting all day in the rain for concert >everything else
Great point...better check my profile before Amazon thinks I'm still looking....cuz I ain't!
My goals aren't orchestrated by haters,but they supply the instruments.
Why do men resort to calling you a bitch when you're more clever than they are
: Rungear consumers have limited windows to assess if a product is right for them, which is why (my 2c) cushy shoes are popular.
I installed Anastasios Tampikas' program Lotto Architect last night. Setting up a game is complicated and I am not done with the first one.
Mindy Kaling's book, Kristen Johnston's book, Tina Fey's BOSSYPANTS (which I haven't read yet). Light enough to fit the bill for summer?
Such a classic! One of my favorite movies :)
Proloquo2Go is not currently switch accessible.
Typical of fans, pouring beer over the rails at players heads, leaving ice last night.
": I can't believe how perfectly shaped your pancakes are!" Lol they taste delicious too
U will always be my .....
now following ya homz
I know you have almost #11millionfollowers but i'm sure #Someday you will follow me. Maybe today =) 65
I love Hollie & Skylar!!! But I sure hope Skylar makes it!!
In love with my new bio. Oh, and display pic while we're at it.
Ray King!
Nils Cline is rocking the double neck guitar.
yea I am
Sometimes，it's not what you say that matters，it's what you don't．
Mrs. Julia is on a rampage. She hasn't stopped since you left
Thanks sweetie RT : Happy Birthday love! Enjoy!
I can't imagine the fees will be high, but then again, I've had an inquiry with them for 2 months and not rec'd response, so..?
headed for my #truenorth tomorrow!
Google Is About To Kill The Gmail App For BlackBerry (RIMM, GOOG) via
LMFAO don't be like that! I may not even go to oakland anyway. My mom lives in stockton.
not just coincidence
What is the future of data?
I heard LeBron James is staying in Cleveland!!!11!1!
If one more person on Facebook titles their photo, "I do it for the ratchets" I will fucking defriend you so fast you'll get whiplash.
RT if yall think one on one is cool follow me I follow back.
Dallas shut down what SUPERBOWL FANS I HAVE TO MISS WORK I LIVE N DALLAS NO FLIGHTS
thankss for following!
Thank to my followers :D ! any more , followers ?
RT : Such as we see when men restrain their breath
Awww prayers sent for your head to feel better...maybe this is why my head hurts..it hurts for you :(
Cute girls go out with ugly guys because its easier for them not cheat when no one wants to have sex with them.
just feeling good
I would give up a fifth round pick. Maybe a fourth for choice.
#Saints catching everything- is there a stat for opposite of 'drops'? For catches made that shouldn't have?
I really like your website. Found the information I was looking for about The Birthplace of The Blues. Thank you!
Woke up uninspired today. Listened to Prince bootlegs for an hour. Problem solved. ;-)
#confession i can be really immature sometimes.. Lolol
00045 Fri 13jan12 . Clock out 0217a . Completed panel: text on panel reads: "a barefoot young man plays flute in middle of empty street"
Opening today An Adaptation of Julius Caesar presented by Fear the Ides of March! $2 off w
I'm the proud owner of a lint roller.
That awkward moment when your bf is smaller then you :/
Oomf get on twitter just to lie .
I am so nervous for Jessica right now!
Thanks! I'll check it out. I like basic. Well, I liked the old Tweetdeck, but ...
1) i hate that i cant RT that. 2) correction: OUR new home.
woo finally!
Just finished personal training session--rewarded with throbbing backache
emerald hills?
Can't waite for Oscar Sunday
That travel call on Withey is the worst worst travel call ever! Some of these calls against Kansas have been ridiculous.
Just asked my daughter if she wanted to watch #PetCemetery2 she said oh no I dare you to watch it with daddy tonight
Users with no CSS or with user sheets are gonna see weird stuff. Markup in JS != maintainable (CMS integration, for instance)
Let's go Tex
Growing boy.
The Pat Sajak Assassins: tonight with Spelling Bee
Thanks to and for the RTs last week! Appreciative of your sharing.
You're welcome! My own story is similar. RT : Thanks Rudy!
YES!! They are all the same, we now have 6 locations in the Seattle area!
May 17, 1998 - David Wells throws a perfect game against the Minnesota Twins at Yankee Stadium. 14th reg season perfect game in ML history.
already miss my family.
#WhenImBord I Watch & Youtube Videos!(:
iggy pop baby
Let's Rockabout! #HRHPickMe The New Year is around the corner! Boom!
Got one, keep an eye out for Pittsburgh!
Battle of elite offenses in this year's Superbowl. Saints wil be victorious. Book your room online at www.vancouverwahotel.com
Sleep is more important than this project
One big Brook Hogan in the Lobby.
There was Dr. Mario on the game cube?!
<==== awe look at da baby
Love is often gentle, desire always a rage.
Just ordered my LSAT study materials. Law school here I come!
That is good to hear and who is that
#SoTellMeWhy justin tells us to never say never, yet, he just said it twice. Hm... ;)
Not enough essplosions I guess.
Thank's for the shout outs!
i going to do that
Yes, I have a Yahoo account. One thing to keep in mind: I love chats about F/M spanking. But I block all spammers & cammers edtomolta on YM
oh my gosh Jazmyne--you would cry over that! i'm going to have to download it now.
Had dinner with an old college friend tonight... Remembering all the phi sig parties made me realize what Rockstars we were :)
tell it like it is man!
Great Bachelor Party weekend. I don't think I'll eat a hot dog or taquito ever again.
wow. That must mean you're an adult
did you know Santa Fe is now 402 years old?
Tried and true and on the list of things were phasing out. :) /cc
Now Bank Of America Is Charging The Unemployed Fees To Use Their Prepaid Benefits Card via
“: Love is a beautiful thing.”
Come PARTY with New Bridges Ballet and NYChic Magazine Thursday at 8pm Rosenthal Auditorium, Kimmel Center, NYU 60 Washington Square S
Does anyone know a good chiropractor in #ABQ?
MG community reeling with the accidental death of sophomore Austin Poppa in a motorcorss accident. Poppa was a varsity baseball player.
The solitude of Earth. The grace of dance embrace. You are so proud! The scattered leaves, slowly circling their way to the ground...
they were in the loop right outside the library
That was fun
To OCR pdfs that have multiple pages larger than 45in, convert pages into EPS files, Save as TIFF files, import to Acrobat (will OCR), Save
finds it funny that Steven Colbert keeps popping up whenever you're looking for information on evaluating websites.
We are not the same....
I laughed my self silly - I don't know who they are but they Rock <3 Kellie
It might be fun... Or I might pretend to be a bloody monster with my face and have a fake knife or something.
Today in 1994, The Channel Tunnel from England to the Continent is completed.
you know yer an AV geek when you illustrate an illuminated truss before getting to the band when illustrating "concert" on
There's no reason to settle.
I can't beleive I am saying this, but I have never been happier that I am losing my job. A bunch of monkeys. (except those that follow me)
Well that $15 double whiskey ginger went down fast.
yessir sounds good
so he writes for diff peeps and recycles old articles hm
Kinda last minute but if anybody could spare some time to model this Sunday April 1 for a figure drawing sesh/photoshoot - hit us up! =)
LOL! RT via Shoeless Joe Jackson and Shirtless Bo Jackson would have had a hard time getting service together.
This weekend may be the most memorable of my entire college career, and I am so ready for it
I hate that somethin is irritating my eye
i followed you both
You're breaking my heart boys.
Rangers won a game down one with 6 seconds left and in triple OT...
4.20 will be a rough day. The greatest man I ever knew - and likely ever will - would have turned 65 today. Happy Birthday, Dad. I miss you!
so you did or didn't see the naked break dancers?
If you use the coupon code cheers15, you can receive 15% off your website orders during November!
The single player must be awful too if the game deserves a zero rating.
like us on facebook at flossatlantatees an get your MOTIVATIONAL TEES TODAY men,women and children sizes
& the survey says
Will someone let find out?! He keeps saying "let me find out". D:
Gotta be at work at 8 and I'm still up..such a dumbass lol
Nightmare after nightmare
Done...and done. Seriously though, canoeing around the bays of Victoria environs would be good fun.
Eating cake and watching a movie :)
How is is that the only class I got an A in was the one I attended least???
Dude, your bag is huge and there is no way it is going to fit in the overhead compartment.
Check out the Rocket Fish project at www.facebook.com/grandhavenartwalk
"how to remove bat from my house"
It's all shits and giggles until someone giggles and shits.
Happy Birthday to my cousin Bigman! Love you! #FreeBigman&KD
Boredd Talk to me!
Nail biter! RT : Winterhawks only up one right now 4-3 they have to hold on and get another score
"I just sharted myself. That's when u fart and u shit yourself on accident!" - wise words of Kris Jenner.
what's the difference between an onion and a whore?
We offer a Free 15min. Qualifying Conference Call with our experts to Licensed Attorneys. www.freereferral.com
Im glad J calmed down but Im so upset over the whole ordeal :(
I've been doing it all wrong! *smacks forehead*
We do still have three branches of government, right?
just is one on million chance that you follow me 1 i hope that you know that you are 18! we will never leave you justin♥ 5
And I did quit programming because I wasn't interested in fighting battles re: sexism. So I now code solo and have more fun
Focused on working out and gettin bigger ! Let's go
it was amazing! Scary, exciting, kept you guessing. And that ending!
Give thanks for everything to God the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians 5:20,
Do you have questions for Ask and
- Pei Wei sounds good. I can head over whenever...maybe early or late lunch to miss the rush.
have fun man! Let me know what you think!
where did yhu make that?
Until the ends of the world. ∞
hey please follow back <3 love your videos they're amazin!
yes i noticed ! hah. omg theres a stupid little flying bug thingy from outside in my room !! ahh it needs to get out ! ;o
“: Breakfast made for me, dishes done, and a big cupcake. That's all I need. #HEBMoms” Sounds like heaven!
So, I'll just pull the stick out of my bum, shall I?
saw the original; +points for tieing it all together
surprised it hasn't happened yet
performing live Fri Jul 27 at the Georgia World Congress Center!
I need some bruh bruh let's link asap
RT “: How can you tell when Mitt Romney is about to LIE? He CHUCKLES.”
This must be a nightmare for Clippers fans right now
your so formal and I thought it wad Harry styles for a sec oops
A few people on Reddit claim they have. Very few though.
Salon Update: Now offering eyebrow waxing, lashes and make up services
I love how when she freaks out she texts me first :)
New CandySwipe FREE game comment in the #android market: "It is the best game that i've ever played" by Sandra
why is it always raining
Follow back?
really windy in Vegas today too. Not impressed. :-/
Why is there no one to text? 😒
yes trying too..depends on where i have to be...
is on tonight .. LISTEN NOW!
I had the same feelings. There must be many, many guys like us.
Thanks for spending your holiday with us!
Here is the link send me a pic when you decide which one you are getting .. you can enter what you are looking for in search
Summer Youth to the Core 10-14 starting June 22nd. Stay tuned for set days and times..
Paramount Public Relations is looking for an intern to work from 9-5 p.m, 15-20 hours a week, or 2-3 days a week. Tasks include supporting …
Happy Easter Robert! Hope it's great (:
Crazy Bread is FAR sexier.
Hey scan thebcrowd more so i can see my tweeps
Class hit by Adrian Wilson. League should take note. (no sarcasm - seriously)
Somebody should text me and help keep my ass awake! 3175251106
Nice, good stuff Hammer...be sure to follow and too :)
Got keep fighting and working hard to get better
Biggie tribute
My history teacher and i are wearing matching colors today and everyone thinks we planed it
RT : Fare thee well, Hines Ward! I love loving a player I would have hated had he played anywhere else.
Even though the #SFGiants are trailing and Timmy has lost all his starts so far, I just have to say I still believe in Go Tim!
congrats!! hooray for hybridity & #alt-ac, sure you'll continue to do amazing things. One quest: Protoss, Zerg, or Terran?
“Man is a goal seeking animal. His life only has meaning if he is reaching out and striving for his goals.”
about time u prove yourself
Hey there, little white eyebrow hair. You must be lost.
Awesome dinner 's and then #MissionImpossible at Harbour East. Love
lol u better b scared shoot! Doin big things lol
This is how I feel about you sometimes, Anita! I hope you realize how special your friendship means to me. xoxo :)
And now I'm getting all the complicated returns. Awesome.
New post: Mount, Universal Cup Holder Mount
Thnx to those in attendance last nite: our Allerton gig was AWESOME. Amazing audience, fabulous room & groovy song requests made it so fun.
Today's game has been moved to Paterson Field. Rain or shine your tigers will be out there!
I could smack every drunk bitch in front of me smoking cloves.
Great game! I am so proud of u guys! Thank you for all of your hard work & dedication!
I am following you Ivan!
I feel like I'm the only one in the relationship. And I'm not saying to get attention or start something. It's just how I feel.
I hope for the day Taylor doesn't call me a whore or slut...... not all dreams come true ._.
NCM and RJ Smiles Inc. are collecting school supplies through Sept 3 for local students!Please drop off any donations at the NCM Launch Zone
yup! You may have to wait, but not for long :)
your latest Everett post was, frankly, too few photos for my liking :) he is so adorable! Looks just like a Gerber model.
You going to game tomorrow night?
This movie is really funny so far so it's like a double win! lol!
Completely obsessed with 's style!
I just realized is most funest director worldwide. The way he made Justin's movie a big selling hit.
ima go check if i can get back on because starting a new account is boring!:) lol
you are not alone. in fact, i'd say EOD is 11:59:59, to be even more precise
How dare you get quenched without me:)!
you should get that trending hahaha
at least one friend :-)
We won $40 this noon in Texas Pick 3. We came within one number of the Daily 4 game (three were right, one was one number off).
Is anyone taking the SAT tomorrow at warren ?! 😁
Chris Lynch, CEO of Vertica named as one of the most exciting mobile/data companies in Boston
that shit was premeditated when he disregarded the police orders to stand down and return to his vehicle.
They'll enjoy it coming from you, lol! Seriously, they run the show there and are AWESOME peeps!
Been gud my luv how bout U?
Well, I still have emails from my first month here.
Is the time that we lie in now borrowed time?
A fantastic day of #acting coaching. Test deals and bookings!
If you're going to be thinking, you may as well think big. -Donald Trump
Only if it's a team sport. Always have a spotter. RT : Drunk Walk Home should be an Olympic sport.
Going to be so lost with my seniors &
I really like her!:)
Wedding gift bag includes boiled peanuts- YUM. Happy to be in the low country!
#chicago Send & redeem REAL drinks for $1.00 at 75 of Chicago's top bars & restaurants! Send drinks to friends, coworkers, & even yourself!
4Any of you w/ #websites, it's always good2 #network w/the #searchengine #experts. Just sayin' :)
Hmm I wonder how many nights iv dreamt bout Too many to count.I wanna kno what ur dreams about him r like.anyone?
Always enjoy your high
LOL like that one time in Courtney's car 😂
Hanrahan got a gift there lol
is it May 30th yet?!?
Wow RT : RT : Nothing worse then an over confident ugly female..
you got it!
I would love to see people actually stand in front of someone and say exactly what they tweet...talk about entertainment!
(4/6) Better way might be – this line item amount generates X value, and this type of expense is typically Y.
are you going to buy them ?
Oh shoot. I'm sorry I missed this. I've been offline quite a bit. :/
Bless your little Irish heart and every other Irish part. - Irish saying
Impressive start to the week...253 teams and over $243k raised! Way to go teams!
Check out my Xtreme Earrings
OMG MIKE BIRBIGLIA
ringringring!!! Hello??? oh HI!!!!! Thanks so much for following! TTYL!!
Commission meeting regarding line drawing is in session. Watch live online www.wedrawthelines.ca.gov.
I think that Matt can recommend the name of a good tattoo artist so that you can avoid that problem in the future.
I'm breaking into my "Going to Lawrence" bottle of Jack.
Looking forward to another awesome concert! Watch Today on !
DON'T FORGET TO GET UR SNEAK PEEK TO THE MOST ANTICIPATED BOOK OF THE YEAR!!!!!!!! ONLY AT www.nickywooten.com
RT : What’s on your #cruise vacation playlist? Share your #MixTapeMonday Freestyle picks for Monday's playlist.
white come over soon, we are getting this place ship shape. Plus I miss you terribly
Would to see a news guy take a spill
I almost popped my middle finger nail today :( I'm glad it didn't . Gotta be more careful .
The kind of asshole that owns a plane.
Looking forward to tomorrow's Clojure webcast by O'Reilly
There are two reasons I don't take naps. 1. I don't fall asleep well. 2. I don't wake up well.
Tick, tock, it's a clock.
Michael Poliakoff of American Council of Trustees & Alumni will be on campus April 16 @ 4 pm - Wren Building!
An interesting article about companies who stop matching 401K - posted on our network homepage - and how to keep building wealth.
haha I'm glad (:
They say that good things take time. But really great things happen in a blink of an eye.
Looking at a very short night. 6 AM flight to #sec12 and straight into #HEISC meeting. Friday train to #stc12!
she broke up with me :(
Substitution, Mexico. Maza replaces Rafael Marquez.
Team 40 - The Ra Ra Sisters, one competitor born in 1944 - the team to watch on the
PGA TOUR/lsn360.com Phil Mickelson at EXTENDED 18 riviera country club California in bunker now
sometimes just get in that mexican music moo.
Well, start with the fact that you're male and go from there... ;)
mhmkay, I added you:) I'm not on right now though, I'm doing homework-_-
Arrogance is ego plus ignorance
Marvin Gaye,Michael Jackson,Luther Vandross,Stevie Wonder,R.Kelly,Donny Hathaway,Smokey Robinson,Teddy Pendergrass,Barry White#Elite artists
We're standing and waiting for atable awkwardly with a bunch of stangers at asain buffet. Ha
I'm hungry as fuck
ok I will call u friday
love love love! That song makes everything better! (:
Lovely service this weekend! I was honored to pay tribute to such a wonderful man! Like me, where ever he is, is the place to be!
I like him, but he does that sometimes - doesn't connect with the hyperlearning segment of our culture. You must be an avid reader
At school and bored
thx Russell! See you in LA soon!
Tonite it's goin' down @ Rejects Sports Bar!!
Next week is probably my next free weekend. Make plans!
Hummus in my future
If they haven't talked to him recently not much to be optimistic about. If confident is a leap sounds like we're still 50/50
The next person to sign in as my coach w/shakeology HD will receive a gift from me!
Thanks. Glad you like it Vivian.
haha, well I choose my posts very carefully
#in hi
Okay Okay so my lil cousin dropped her cupcakes on herself and pointed on her shirt saying " me ensucie ? :(" & i said no and
But the same day, I saw another flying over my head: D
Thanks! I call him "files" and sometimes "supplies". ;) RT PPPB nice! congrats to you and your label maker - whats his name? LOL
Baptism is the tangible way we participate in the ressurection of Jesus Christ. Colossions 2:12. Do you need to be baptized on Easter?
R.I.P Justin Bieber *
Im a dj its in my blood... I anit going to stop rocking this shit... You know what it is...
no -_________- I'm not
Early atonement is never good :-). Feel better!
i miss smallville and bones
is making a home cooked Italian dinner 🍝 😊
Gah, I'm off Twitter when Duck Dunn dies? I need to know this stuff!
We hope so too! RT I hope they put some in that G&T
Bye Arizona ! I want to redo this week all over again
getting over food poisoning and super excited about being in Vegas for the week. Sad I will miss my friends...
I am laughing my ass off so hard.. I knew it! I knew it!!!!!!! I deserve an award!
What a disgusting performance
I really should be! :) I would be down to chill sometime yo.
I think it's because I miss her
volleyball! I went to hit a ball then landed on it wrong. 
Let's just say, I can get the faucet back running 💦😏
"Like" if you already started playing baseball. "Comment" on when you start.
I'm not sure you are qualified to answer that. Plus, didn't we already celebrate this holiday on Saturday?
Watching Braxton Miller run for that TD and all I could think was, I don't wanna hear it,
- thanks for the follow. Can you email more info to ? Thanks and be well. Marc
macaroons are awesome. you should try them. being a lesbian is not as awesome. probably just experiment with macaroons.
Lunch/Site one Tuesday this Spring/Summer TBD. LMI is Library Management Institute.
#SportingKC wins 3-0! Goals by , & ! Good game boys!
idk if he gone have the car.. who you goin to robbins with?
and #rest351, Not sure his disc. of ToT is "reactionary"/"insincere" rather he is documenting assumed Christian dominance.
Awesome! Thank you so much!
No love for reusable glassware?! :) RT : I love you red solo cup❤
No, it always falls on a Sabado. Or not.
Miley Is Not A Bad Girl :D
Congrats to Rayce for winning #faceoff Awesome work!
Hey, y'all! Go grab 's album that hit stores today! They're SUPER awesome guys! Totally worth it!!
I'm done trying. #You'veLostMyRespect.
I think an adventure is our future! Just saying. lol!
Hey, please help how I can watch?! (:
this one is moreso R&B and I am showing some versatility. I'm rapping on it ;). It's different
It was so good! And the new one is actually on deck as my next book. 😊
What a crappy day at work, only 590 more to go.
You are loved.....more than you can ever possibly imagine. (Ephesians 3: 18-19)
#AskAlexConstancio Alex! if you could go anywhere in the world, where would you go?(:
waking up at 8 am to go with
I've been planning a lot of fun activities for the summer. To bad I'm going to ditch all of them and just sleep and watch tv.
friday afternoon in the universe...
Just downloaded #minecraft thru #xboxlive let's see what the hype is all about this game... #fail or #epic we shall see????
Argument may win the situation but lose the person, but Patience may lose the situation but win the person.
Smiling like an idot(';
the problems we faced in wisconsin are the same problems we face at the national level- fitzgerald
I want you to kill the opening set Tonight! As usual I know you will murder the dance floor!
You are most welcome! Wish one of us could make it. We let some of the cities on our platform know that are nearby.
I like yur website :)
check out the wall on The Vox Essence Music Competition there's a mini contest for an interview lets get it guys!
uh can you say NASTY.
There is a Halt for a reason. Somebody has doubt...hm let justice prevail.
RT : #cloud Only "true cloud" provides compute/app services not just access/transmission.
I've been on w tech support for an hour. Waiting supervisor because tech support wont help. NEVER buy an TouchPad. Crappy product.,
GOOD LUCK & have fun
": Thanks for the follow back! You bad! Keep balling oh so hard! :-)" Aww your welcome!!
Ah! Just realized I have been listening to genesis for the past 2 minutes. Not cool 80s channel. Not cool.
Good morning Tweeps...one day before the Amateur Millionaires Club TV show premieres...will u be watching? Tune in 10:30pm on MYATL TV
yea im waiting on the master radio version to come back so i can hit 107.9 battle ground
GOOD MORNING RISE AND SHINE! :))
"Spring Jump-Off," 18 & Under, Friday, May 18 feat local artists for details call 412-969-7456
I here u lol
wow i just took mine off not long ago on the side wow lol
me too haha
I use a Canon Rebel T3i with the standard 18-55mm lens that comes with it or my 50mm lens.
Don't forget all the zombie Mothers this Sunday!
I love when my glasses and contacts are 65 miles away. I feel like Stevie Wonder.
.'s actions were totally uncalled for. He's gotta realize his actions are purely unprofessional & not an example to set for kids!
Adam Dunn playing LF today. bwahahaha *queues up circus music*
Either give me a chance or let me go
I'm going to put on some war paint and dump a bunch of High Life in Lake Monona... Anyone have a boat?
That might just be my all time favorite tweet.
TOTALLY. But I still want Troy to go on an immunity run and shake shit up or its going to be a boring next 5 episodes.
Amber Riley And Chord Overstreet
I'm not sure I hate anything more than when a napkin sticks to my drink when I pick it up.
playing golf on my property with tree walnuts.
Tied at fulltime - going to extra time! 2-2. Watch ESPN for extra time! Enjoy
I have never met Denzel Washington
too much money, aint enough money
I'm such a sucker for a nice smile 😍
what, are you saying I can't really be that hip?
#Nurses, what would happen if robots took over caring? Just one of the provocative questions explored in our book review of Alone...
kay, soo... is absolutely beautiful<3 we love her so much! Please follow back? xo
lol! He ate better than me!
digging the new track doods! Swing by the site and check out the post when you get the chance. Cheers!
ITS FRIDAY B####ES! time to pick the funniest photo of the week! 3 more hours to send us 1!! who is going to win the $20 itunes giftcard??
thanks for the love!!!
NOT EVEN CLOSE...he's even worse at infidelity than Jordan was...and that's not saying much!
great day to be on the red storm
Your butt is a legend, Mallory! And yes... he is.
New episode of Magic City and butter pecan ice cream.
I want.
shout out to Meek Mill!!! over 1 million mixtape downloads in like 12 hours. That's fucking crazy
that thing is awwweeesssoooommme! lunch date soon?
u already owe me 20 lol
People who order wine at the club <<<
bitchy mood ? Yes.
RT " Roger Klotz?" Ha it will $$ ya we'll spray paint u green/hair orange, leather jacket & Miley as ur purple cat
I find out a friend has cancer...what do I go do? Smoke a cig. Fuck I'm strange
Alright I don't know where Dana is anyway
princeton make sure u look for a girl with a green shirt with ur picture that says SpreadThePeace 💚
“: um y u don't got your copy of Loud Pack yet?”>>>didn't know it was on sale lol...where?
Los Angeles Voice Therapy is now offering LSVT LOUD for individuals with neurological conditions like Parkinson Disease
he says , "touch me LIKE you care" cause he sure knows I dont.
I think you're amazing! :)
how old are you
We're grown ups. We can put our underwear over our OWN heads dammit.
Area Division 2 teams at Deerfield Classic include: Sugar River, Columbus, Lake Mills, Marshall & Randolph/Cambria-Friesland.
Zig Ziglar Motivation is what gets you started. Habit is what keeps you going.
#BYU #Nevada #Eagles I want Matthews at 28 for the #Ravens please :)
don't miss my convo w "The End of Advertising" at #RTTS12 today 11am
Our sponsor donated several books, some Xbox 360 games, and an Xbox 360 controller!
Tonight's #MadMen had The Beatles' Tomorrow Never Knows & Saved By The Bell's Mr. Belding.
whats the move for later ? :)
Are you twerkin at the Bali tonight?! I may stop by on my way home from work!
i said that i might!!!
"Money flow like water, I'll just wait at the dock"
CONGRATULATIONS ARIZONA STATE SOFTBALL - NATIONAL CHAMPIONS!!!!!!!!!!
Awww...miss you guys too! We need a phone date soon :)
I tried playing it for the guy next to me, and he moved seats. Score!
i love courtney
(AP) -- The Indianapolis Colts announce end of quarterback Peyton Manning's playing career with club
Wrap day 2; didn't rain, but we were pummeled by 40mph winter winds. Can't be perfect, but it was close. Best cast & crew that Oregon has!
OK, if I get this one install to work I'm saying F it to work and heading outside!
#FF Superstar Sisters
Faith is like radar that sees through the fog. ~ Corrie Ten Boom
: was listening to "time baby take it" and misheard the lyric as "down baby chicken"! <3 LOL
beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep beep , I win .
Why is suicide looked down on?
We all need to trend #HappyBirthdayBiancaC all day tomorrow! RT to spread the word!
Doing the manliest thing ever.. thinking about
We love #Online_Gamer the web-serie and U ?
Some people just need to get hit by a bus or something..
Just found out #Boo isnt something you call your girlfriend lol
If you are using , I definitely recommend checking out the add-on. Super simple log search and alerting.
whenever u can me and will meet up with u
"i'm thinkin' yea on that cheese"
Work 2morrow but I'm thinking bout my birthday (which is in November) & wat to do. Any suggestions?
THugh what it do?
u r so pretty
I just sent a work email referencing the "minor tweets" I made to a document. I thought women were supposed to be good at multi-tasking?
Best part of eating near Disneyland is the large gangster looking men wearing pink lanyards with princess coin purses hanging from them. :-)
Sounds insanely busy...“: Cinco De Mayo block party this sat Vegas next weekend chic weekend after Indy 500....
Down to 5 Buddy Bike Sport with 5 leads. 1st-come, 1st-serve on the last of this model unitl 2013! Lots of Buddy Bike Family still in stock!
Hey mikes a good guy! RT : Wow...thanks. RT : mike you have a perfect face for radio."
Goodmorning Everyone ;** Say It Back !
too early. need coffee. stat.
If uu anit shitting then get off the pot
thank u!!
I've been more of a college student this week then I have all semester..co-op, STAMP, Cole, Byrd, sitting on the mall,
Why the fuck isn't the snow green? Ireland you have failed me!
I would watch the crap out of that. Such glorious schadenfreude.
Omg there are goldfish swimming in the center-pieces!!
hell yea blood.
The Alper JCC invites you to join our extended family of Members.
casey anthony
Courtside- Rockets & Bobcats.
Right?! I tried using that excuse & was told, "Babe, I'm 42, if I can make it so can you."
Bbm can like to behave this early morning o..
haha! Nope, I'm not feelin' that today!
i thought tish worked til 2 today not u....
Why? RT : Tatt appointment at 3.. I might cancel that bitch.
No hot water at gym this morning. Saw a desperate lady shampooing in the steam room.
so apparently, my big fat gypsy wedding is in ripley? xDDD
well, we're waiting!
When did youtube start taking 5hrs to upload something!
so this would be a prime morning for me to take advantage of my man crush?
Publish anthology (stud art, wrtgs) via corp sponsors/grants. Distribute locally. IE, free n #RVA via Kroger, Martins stores
Why am I up so early?!
btw where you want me to tweet you? here or your other account
It’s important to understand that all deep issues held within the cells of the body generally leave in layers.
haha i wish i could but im in alaska!
congrats on the invite. Exceed their expectations!
not if I kick back! :)
Oh, hi you! Over here, in my office, trying to keep it together!
watching never say never while i do my work
Can we clone Kyrie and play at least three of him in the fourth quarter?
OMG!! Just a couple more hours till 2011!!! =D
Glad you enjoyed the #ibed!
We preserved it in plastic and hung it on the wall. Now we are checking yearbooks for money & love letters, LOL.
#nowplaying George Mesterhazy, Everytime We Say Goodbye, he is amazing on the piano!
I can get my uncle to make some custom baby gators.
Sensitive, schmensitive. Oprah fucking rocks and I'm happy to step outside with anyone who disagrees.
I see the carefully-tended roots of the Mittleremensch, the Average Men, watered by science and math, statistocrats specialized to dust.
why not have a most popular in each city, each restaurant feature?
Good morning... Time to make the donuts... I mean paninis for the party today. Hope to see you here from 11a -3p. Very excited are we.
Drummer Keith Moon of The Who died on this day in 1978 of an overdose of Clomethiazole.
SB45 Biz Lesson # 29: Be a gracious winner and learn from your losses.
Edwards says racing w/o stress of sponsors, women and $$ is def better than racing w that stress ... he says been there, done that
Goodnight #Denver_Broncos! TB with a performance for the ages. Devine intervention won't make this easier for
Sitting in the new Lorenzi Park, eating my lunch and enjoying the breeze. Also finally figured out how T9 works on my cellphone!
We are honestly super glad! Thanks Kaeley! :)
I saw him speat at case.edu should be good. RT : Looking forward to hearing Dean Kamen speak tomorrow
“: "Gettin' jackety jacked up beer backed and doubled up stand up and make some noise, we're gonna party like Cowboyz!"” WORD !!!!
now my answer for everything."why didn't you write your essay?"BECAUSE HERMIONE DID IT ONCE AND SHE WAS ATTACKED BY A TROLL
#ReplaceCodySongsWithUnicorn Unicorn Day :'D
I've heard that. Great professors always make learning fun.
Been reading your tweets and I like your style. Thanks for being one of the only followers to not use an auto-DM!
Richie a trader lol
RT : 6. Don't wind your neck or roll your eyes when you talk to people.
Oh my! Soo full!
"Stay down." "You're gonna have to kill me."
Knowing the size of the voice isn't what makes a difference,but that it will be heard does!
Wtf the unemployment line is slow as a bitch n paperwork out the ass
#edchat innovation occurs at tables of collaboration versus rows of isolation
YES!!!~ I'm not jailed anymore:D
what kind of dog do you have?
you've been hanging out with me too much
We r partying hard here for ladies night!!!!! Nothing but fun fun....I'm holding on!!! Miss ya
Happy Easter!
for tweeting I'll CYA tomorrow, if not I'll CYA later
Thoughts become things :)
Sleeping with a married man.
"The most important thing a father can do for his children is to Love their Mother" --The Rev. Theodore Hesburgh
Just finished an amazing 10-hour documentary series in Netflix. It is called Carrier, and traces the prep and 6-mo deployment of USS Nimitz
great piece
I think you're phone is taken up where are we sitting for lunch?
Good luck on your tests! You and I both know they're very UN-GRAND, but that's life.
If you want to see someone who makes everyone smile, look at ♥
Got a win with my pre k group went 0 n 3 n pool play but won 1st bracket game
Together website is finally coming together. Thanks to everyone involved!
Help! Any ideas on how to locate a misplaced #iphone with ringer turned off? Any way to make it wake up and ring? #Apple and #ATT no help.
is the worst...Internet outage for the whole city. Don't use them.
Nov 1861 Union General Jefferson Davis leads his measle-ridden troops across Missouri.Buried at Crown Hill in Indianapolis.
I think ones karma and klout scores are inversely proportional.
hahaha omg do it ! and the later he fails at paying the more interest he pays haha jk jk
I'm going bk
you're welcome :)
spank you happy helperton!!
Hate a old desperate nigga!
ewww i have to go to school :P
Whos bored other than me?
if facts point to Joe "covering it up" as you strongly claim then why has AG stated otherwise 3 different times?
I need me a good book to read.
We Just Coolinn .
Really, really tired. Had a great weekend with my sweetheart. Fun, fun, fun all the time with him. Work is killing me. Really worn out.
don mclean
..are you sure there's worse? Hahahah
hey, senior guys ;)
Happy Monday to Everyone.
You think you know your boyfriend but then you find out.......... He is cheating on you:( FML!:( life sucks right now:/
Time for a run. Endomondo will have the details shortly
lies! Because I not goofy
So true. RT : "Design for kids and you'll engage adults too."
i'm more concerned with all time low's 6th anniversary of being signed than some stupid commercial hallmark holiday
The Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association has endorsed for mayor.
Im astounded how people can want a conservative and go for three fake conservatives. Only one answer:
Okay,sorry guys I wasn't here in twitter for a long time because I forgot my password but now I have fixed it..
Riding with is a test in both will and physics.
After the release of Adobe Air 3.0 Extensions, developing games/apps for mobile using the Flash Platform seem to be an option now.
Unexpected sight of the day: aggressive Prius driver.
I think is the biggest Mahomie no matter what. She has been there from the very beginning(:
Welcome to the human zoo
Let's Go
I've been trying to fix myself lately , but because of it I feel like I'm drifting from the people I'm closest with..
RT Cambridge's Capsicum Framework Promises Efficient Security For UNIX/ChromeOS: An anonymous reader writes "Commun......
I hear christian makes up a lot of jokes
Hear my prayer god give ear to the words of my mouth psalms 54:2.
I think of the same thing when I look at my balls, there amazing and phenomenal
I know Michele Bachmann is a mean girl and a fascist, but I thought "Windbag Spice" was pretty funny.
Niggas talk shit and them shells flyin at you
If dm isn't working you can email
So looks like I missed out on some star gazing ? :( I will try again tho #NoJoke it sounds Awsome :)
Linking of text and audio is a critical need - especially for language learners.
wants to remind you: "you can't always get what you want, but if you try sometimes......you just might find......you get what you need"
Just wanted to stop by and say HI! I'm getting the car's oil changed and they have internet access!
FRIENDS don't let FRIENDS #VOTE #REPUBLICAN - Take our red states back to BLUE
RETWEET IF U WANT MORE FOLLOWERS [FOLLOW THE BEAUTIFUL FOR AN INSTANT FOLLOWBACK && 250 NEW FOLLOWERS]
peruvian dish? um well idk theres one peruvian resturant I always go to call punto peru, but I only get the fries
Always great to see you! Exciting to hear about everything you're working on.
Wow. Thank you. So very sweet of you. You have no idea how much i appreciate it and I hope you are right.
Reading "The Breath of a Wok" and feeling super psyched about Chinese food dinner party.
Wow, Phil is ACTUALLY calling out grandparents in his demo. This reminds me of that Florence Henderson site.
thanks Kendall!! Miss you!
Nice salon concert tonight with john randall.
me too hubby tilled an area for me!
The King is on point!!
#Boston Kebab House is now on #Belly in the Financial District! You can earn enough points to win a trip to Turkey!
TIRE CHANGE
lol my bad bro
lol okay..... Come get us so we can spend tha night!
Getting a chance to upload my phone pictures from my older tweets.
do you know what time..?! xx
Bored as hell!
I'm afraid we mostly deal with African American art and objects. You might try asking the Smithsonian African Art Museum!
And turned and took 2 steps. No slo mo needed. RT : He caught that pass bitch
Get in out of the wind at the Nob Hill Shop & Stroll tonight. We'll be sampling hot teas from !
Go to www.miracle16.com!
I am starting a Peyton Manning to Baltimore Ravens rumor because sometimes rumors become truth.
Thanks for the help! We can't wait for this weekend! Happy Holidays!
have fun!
Woo hoo Man-city! Great win!!!
Sorry I missed you when you were at GU, I was flying out to Chicago. Next time you are in D.C.?
almost forgot. no sour cream?
Who wants in on the next photo contest? Who will participate?
that statistics show that more 16-25 yr old males watch more porn in the morning than eat breakfast .... thought it was funny
Fifth time cycling but back online at the moment. We'll see how long it lasts.
Shallow men believe in luck strong men believe in cause and effect
Mark Johnson: "Don’t make the machine into a magic box: the blood goes in an whoosh we get DNA information."
You really have to love yourself to get anything done in this world. Lucille Ball
Tired from watching #americasmostwanted last night via The #sextrafficking story was crazy. So powerful! And I'm pissed.
LET'S GO THE BEACH BEACH LET'S GO GET AWAY!
Haha thanks! Cant wait to have you guys back at a show :) RT : was rocking out to lill Red rooster! Jed brings the heat!
For REAL, for real.
Booth set up at #aam11. Looking forward to the next couple of days. Stop by and say hello.
Ima king no matter how the cards are dealt..
Toothbrush Express offers great prices on Plak Smacker Dental Floss and most oral care products.
I really really need a job.
what that ?
Oh great, how was school?
I need to grow both of these but My plans tend to die...
Tell your children, out loud, everyday, that you love them, no matter how old they are.
noice! I've had a lot of personal stuff come up lately so I've been distracted... Still need to finish first book...
I feel like an empty aerosol can
"No government as such is ever in favor of the freedom of the individual." - H. L. Mencken
we are both #nerdy win-win.
I'm made very uncomfortable when people use the word 'shat' colloquially.
more and more reasons to be excited for nyc #2moredays :)
They say the best things in life r free....
great work man, nice to meet you.
Don't tell me to click on your picture on Facebook unless you're naked.
#np young sam - froze and blowed
So u want me to come over, cook, clean put a smile on ur face but only if I'm silent so u can do ur grad studies. Yeah, uh no.
 yah. And cool.
" I love shouting "woo pig sooie""
Stokely Carmichael, aka Kwame Ture, was named the chairman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee in May of 1966.
Not yet guys, calm down. I can't wait to be a mommy way way way in the future lol
You have no idea how annoying it is to know someone won't come after you when you walk away.
It's funny how sometimes you'll listen to a song the first time, HATE it, listen to it again, and fall in love. Humans are weird.
Is it wrong I'm kinda enjoying this Backstreet Boys/NKOTB performance? Reminds me of being 13 all over again ha!
haha yeah I busted an ex on mine this morning, which is what sprung the thought.
i thought it meant little boy.. Still doesn't make sense. Now I'm insulted 😞
Unless you are being facetious and I am just dense.
I love ! :) you're perfect.
The Beach w/ Leonardo Dicaprio - minus the drama, that place was gorgeous!
no but u can get to know me
Southern sun sets
Did you move back into your tree house?
damn i'll be in jersey too but at KTUphoria -_-
Doing what I do best...styling hair!
Life reinvents itself every time we learn something new, do something we have never done and feel something we have never felt.
The kids prank called me three times while I was at a movie. This is not how you convince me to get you a phone.
The best thing you can do to help the Hubbard's is keep your mouth shut. Stop anyone who talks about it. We're a family, so stop the rumors.
Awww everyone on my tl going to proms or going to see someone leave I hope everyone come to mine!
tells us about "neogeography" in the early years!
Train stations shud deff have glass walls all around the platforms not jus the waiting rooms with slidin doors n heat its deff way too cold!
I wonder if he can even handle 1 chop across the chest? Oh wait, the might be sexual harassment in his case.
People with locked tweets always tweet the best shit
It's the same qualities I require from a man
sweet! Well, #PrettyLittleLiars comes back in June, so I guess they will be my summer shows. :)
This isn't supposed to happen to me!/: I never did anything wrong..
Are those chocolate "shells" the cupcakes are in? How do u make those? Gorgeous!
SOMEONE DM ME I'M BORED(;
Love is much more powerful then lust follow me ya'll
Fear lives in your mind, but only if you let it.
I think that is totes cute (:
Amazing. Not saying it wouldn't work...
I've come across rotting bodies that are less offensive than you are.
March 28th is getting closer every day. Have you done your part yet to Stop the Ban and save medical cannabis in San Diego?
Unless you are having terrible or terrential rainfall your Directv should work. Perhaps DTV needs to peak your system again.
im off all week, let me know, hopefully as soon as possible so i can stop stressin about this shit!
when I watched it I was the only one who noticed cuz my friends are losers
The happiest people dont necessarily have the best of everything but they make the most of everything.
And twins <3
Things do not change; we change. Henry Thoreau
GO FALL IN A HOLE
I remember when sang to me.>>>
keep trying please
10 years ago today I was in 7th grade health when an announcement came over to turn on the tv
RT : Thor’s battle armor? Nick Fury’s trenchcoat? Which of the #Avengers has the coolest costume?
thank you. Looking forward to that tent today!
uhh the wedding
Long weekend coming.
LOL!!!!!! This Brian McKnight video is so fuckin funny.
Remember to live
Maybe so. I just think a rebuild will be necessary after this year esp. if we lose ZG. Might as well get a jump on it.
Thanks, that means a lot. I'll invite u 2 da wedding :)
is that you?
Good morning #AI! Good luck to my University of Wisconsin colleagues today!
#Legoland California announces it will introduce "The Pirate Reef", a Pirate-themed Water ride & expand "Star Wars" Miniland.
Scrubbed transcripts = too little too late. He needs to own his assholery, throw himself on his sword.
The world is hugged by the faithful arms of volunteers. ~Terri Guillemets
Taking the leap to try out reddit. Any subreddit recommendations from my tweeps?
It is also only correct to watch a music video for the first time in 1080 p HD.
Brokerage Takes on the Goat: Lightning Brokers, a pharmacy and health store brokerage, has just brought on board the Natural Secrets ...
where were you tonight?
Love Sumi! RT : State Bar names Sumi Judge of the Year The Wisconsin State Bar Association announced Dane County circuit court
There is nothing more entertaining than reading tweets that were meant to be embarrassing text messages.
I just saw somebody with "I GOTTA P" on their license plate. I wonder what that means..
I really hate when people dont give me the attention I deserve! A text msg doesnt take that long 2 send.
no, I haven't!
thank you hun.
I ain't reading the word right now bro but I'm worshipping. The walls group-make me over ft. Nakkita clegg foxx on youtube
Judge Mike Petty of Cedar Hill needs2be removed or disbarred! Its not right wut he is doing to kids&families in his crt! Its ab LAW&JUSTICE
thanks for the RT!
Man oh man how I love my originals. Watching Looney Tunes of classic Warner Bros. <3
Go Gov Christie! What a great leap putting those paper laws into action!
scheduled the date without telling anyone. Totally screwed over several people and the medical organization. Total bs.
Anyone know front-end dev's who would want some occasional work?
#OWIF: Richard: "I love you, man, but my girlfriend's family is staying with us and I can't have any of your shenanigans this week."
u got the hook up for the low? hook a nigga up 250!!
Thank you for bringing me this presentation with limited commercial interruption.
is working to reschedule clients. Enough of this weather already.
Deleting our texts makes me feel like I'm deleting evidence.
We wish our followers nothing but the best in 2012! Continue to be great and nothing less than that!
My Love Is Wur It At !
Breaking News: Watch Family Guy Season 10 Episode 19 Mr. &amp; Mrs ...
In what should have been self-evident, I discovered last night that North Hollywood strip clubs are completely and utterly worthless.
Being someone's first love may be great, but to be their last is beyond perfect.
yeah you're right. hopefully ill be throwing tucks by the time i get back lol well im going to bed night see you at school
did i just see #ghettyimages on #thepitch?
"Don't you wanna dance, say you wanna dance, don't you wanna dance. Oh I wanna dance with somebody."
I told u I would
miss you! <3
Food :D
Radio Personality of the Year - Barry G
hahah thank you
I'm freakin' hungryy. I wanna cook something (: But at the same time I don't wanna move.
yeah im down if you scoop me up from doral lol
I want to eat at Portillo's for lunch but I have lunch at 10 and it's closed. ;(
Coffee... Need lots of it.
home safe peeps!
Y'all getting pumped for the upcoming event?! "Off the Grid." July 11th.
In the cab headin to JFK. It's been one hell of year that surely warrants a summer in Florida with the fam.
#caps, playoffs.
Talking to 7th graders bc you can' t find friends your age.
yes, there is a fee $7/month
My nigga Paul fuller be snapping
I'm sick of article submission sites, realizing social networking is far more powerful as an SEO tool.
Bf3 looks really good
Signed up for twitter today--learning how it works
big time response happening today. He tweeted an ALERT late last night that he was going to unleash. I'd listen to pod if I was u
Can people stop bitching about Latos now?
haha dude! im just awesome like tht xP
Ohio finally coming together.... Better late than never for
Congrats to Bill Haas!
RIP Junior :(
Had such fun! My pleasure. Thanks for helping make it awesome!
Yeah he is making some BIG changes but it's all for us and we should be happy for him.
#BasicQuestion: Twitter behavioral scientists, when dealing with collinearity, how often do you regress on principal components?
Thanks for supporting the Mission and serving the homeless!
"feelings of knowing": when we're certain we can find the answer by continuing to think about the question.
yeah, but you're a hater.....I'm a lover
An eclipse of the sun- japan inundated with tsunami.
Life is a action sport...participation is a requirement!
I miss Ricky Smiley in the mornings
Failure to start is the seedling of fear. Fears can & do sink us, leaving us living a “less than” life. Don't let fear postpone your dreams.
“ LIFESIZE MIRROR 8wks on BillBoard Jazz Charts
#hashwagon NEW! Whoop! Whoop! Proud of self for making up new word :)Group hug...Oops, multiple personalities 2B only expressed in fiction.
Got my TICKETS & MEET AND GREET for on 8/11!!!! #greatestwomanonearth #winning 😝💗👍
#mettaworldpeace has been watching a little too much playoff hockey
Anthony Davis will be on Jimmy Kimmel on Thursday
who has a modem, it's 2012? Guess people who make jokes like this...
RT : SAN ANTONIO! Tonight, join at PEPPER... at RIO... & at KLUSOZ.
i'm back!
they betta stop playin shitty & be more aggressive go C's 🍀🍀🍀🍀🍀🍀
Wow the Kings scored? Color me surprised
for a limited time u can find our newest, sweetest flavor, sweet potato at
My mom is an elementary school teacher and taught sisters named Peaches, Cherry, and Tangerine. Not even joking.
do i know you ?
Now Ii Just Cooked some Bacon!
I hate you cramps :/
Thank you and absolutely!
Back when I ran a blogging tips blog, I never paid a cent to designers.
Billy Joel wouldn't be so goddamn broke if he was man enough to tell that asshole to put cash in the jar instead of all that fucking bread.
Co-worker of Gordon's called. Dwight's not happy about it. Not sure what to do about that. Have to go pick up Hermia now.
RINO!": I am a Conservative: Liberals C your individual rights as an obstacle 2 their power. They are PETTY fascists.
Should i be a model?
Going to check out the video now. have to wash this lovely curly bush tonight! Have a blessed day sister.
so annoying. Always.
You're making my heart stop beating. Please don't let me down.
Can't wait! For #SomewhereSafer by produced by , tomorrow!
i remember this dude from way back at Mount Comfort
love u
Stick with me, Jerry.
thank you gentlemen! really appreciate it.
glad you liked it - it was a lot of fun
I wish I was there! That sounds better than where I am.
sire hook cpope up with a performance slot for June 23 n if available no bs
Want to save on your next ticket purchase? 5% off your next Hockey game. Just use discount code "twitter"
I know, but it still makes me happy.
HANDS. GO. UP. andtheystaythere.
This American Life episode RETRACTION is freaking riveting!!
Whts up sexy ar u zambian.
Tonight is Charleston night for America's Most Wanted! Cases include Dan Hiers out of Mt. Pleasant, the Santa Muerte murders out of...
Her cellphone's name was Luka. It vibrated on the second floor.
Love it!!
Right on. If there's anything I can do to help, holla.
loving' the profile pic.
Even the female Santa twirlers are good.
WTF is Corey Hart doing? That guys brain is the size of a peanut. You idiot, even if that drops, you wouldnt have made it to 3rd
Just want to give a shout out to who were kind enough to donate a Voyager pedal during our showcase at last week!
Alabama Crimson Tide 3/8 ′ Script ‘A ’ Post Earrings – 10KT Gold Jewelry
“: Getting ready for VCDX bootcamp at #VMwarePEX with and a few other really smart guys.” <-- same here!
Off to #SHEAR2011 in Philadelphia. Come to the President's Plenary Session at 5:15 pm!
I live in Jakarta, Indonesia, With my mom and my sisters. I'm 15. I was born on March 1, 1997. Where's your dad?
#fridayreads it is time for The Cut by George Pelecanos! Can't wait.
Excited to be at #FemTechNet with an awesome group of feminist theorists/makers
....where is Kimmy when you need her??
nothing to say to Squeal of Fortune?
Warm up the bus
It's downright balmy outside.
How's everyone doing today? :) Going to be dropping a mixtape this summer hopefully studio quality. Hit me up for collabs. Love ya guys <3
what u doing at a pageant?
8 runs in 4+?? Lackey needs to check himself. Tito should have said "Seriously? Give me the damn ball."
>>>> does not come up when I go to click on it to follow
- what working on this takeover strategy..what it do?
yeah - I have to do the 3rd grade trick of replacing the its with "it is." Alphabetizing requires I sing "A, B, C" as well. Sigh.
voted and voted u are amazing!
“: hi chip!!” aww thanks for the love!!! You have much love from the East Coast!!! 😊 I need to get back to LA
You'll be fine ;D
but i know you miss me, too. do you have to go to chicago anytime soon?? #milwaukee is calling your name :-)
Only in South Florida you can hit up the beach mid-December
Need to extend those deals! - heading to Indy?
#Awake is so good, I almost don't wanna watch it anymore
shit i cant afford a bus pass.. and i gotta car and they cuttin routes man
Recently a customer requested Black Tea w/ Rose Petals. heard you and has whipped up a batch of limited edition here....
bored!!! someone tweet me!!
Patrick and I are filming grilled icecream for WeSun
returning tomorrow to get the music up to par! Get to Moorea early, open 11-7pm!
"What's in the Works" -Tune in to 94.9, "The River" around 7:05am today to hear about changes to household hazardous waste program.
Me "can I donate blood?" dad "are you getting money for it?" me "no" dad "no we live in a capitalist system"
$60 to fill the #SAAB.... That hurt.
saw a girl eating a Hot Pocket and enjoying it??
i wish we didn't have to go to school and we were just born smart. i wonder how life would be then....
do you happen to have a extra pair of tickets for tommarow???...
that's what we get for copying it from someone else's tweet and not double checking.
Super home sale. com
Rondon Triple Double once again!
u would...if i didnt kbow u or know what u looked lile.ide think u were fat af hababa
That was epic live TV!!!
Hello everyone! :D
i know a few meet me in the morn ill introduce you RT Research shows that 1 in every 200 people is a psychopath.
Dont you go to to eat? Seems tailgating defeats part of the purpose.
Love it! RT : Yes! Live, Learn, Engage - UWWResLife and Connect, Achieve, Succeed - UWW FYE.
More numbers!!!!
To be an effective ball-handler, keep hand on top of the ball & pound the dribble. Ball should hit floor & be back in your hand immediately
M&Ms for breakfast and Game 7
The best is yet to come.
I won't be the first one to talk...
strep is tough...take care...hope u feel better soon
I'm hoping for an Elwayesque send off Manning and can't wait to see him in a new uni in
And I say to myself, it's a wonderful world. - Louis Armstrong
Interesting to compare comments on Obama's gay marriage announcement on NYT and WashPost. NYT's more articulate, less talk radio-esque.
Join us at 5:20 today in the ASC for a Lunch & Learn on APA Citation
Need developer-#drupal #javascript #php experience for spinoff #tech co. Software platform/software as service. email
Walking home from the gym @ 7am, I walk past a teenage kid waiting for his bus...straight up smoking a joint in the open. Good morning!
Thanks for the shout out today!! Will you be sending me a quote soon?
I use Echofon, it's easy to use, and has all the options as using twitter on your laptop
sure am. Because of you and Pete, we cheer for the St.Louis Cardinals too. Not to be confused with the local Cardinals here
woohooo yay willow smith and jaden smith one for young award :D
Dear please capture said punch & tears on video camera #priceless RT Dear - if u text me
Good morning, starshine... the earth says hello!
i wanna add a big card to my collection so i might sell a lot of my stuff
Baby should get two grades. One for before Dwight got injured, and one for after.
Work on a Sunday, fuck. At least it's with
I fear with all the in fighting - it will be a steep climb. We need to get Scotty out!
is hosting a contest right now..and the winners get a killer, awesome prize pack of new Night Owl Custom Apparel clothes!!
a girl! Her name is Riley Hall
I hate you! Lol no I dont I love you, but congrats girly! Have fun! (:
New Long Island City huge loft $1700. per month.
Hopefully has a great time watching glee tonight!
We're fans of a simple "haha" or "hah," depending on how hard you're actually laughing. Maybe even "I'm laughing out loud."
excuse me i can't hear you, the motorcycle gang in my neighborhood is driving by...
or at least a pillow...I understand
If One Direction wasn't famous & they lived near me, I would kidnap them & keep them in my closet. They would pretend to be turtles...
I am so riled up after that conversation that there is not a chance I am going to be able to sleep. Ugh!
All my followers will probably wake up around the time I finish my second soccer game today -__-
thats right somebody put her accident on the internet too..kinda weird sigh so sad so sad she's missed
Made one!!!
everyone must follow ! Her tweets are amazing.! I love them.!(:
Multifamily Brokers: We offer 10% of year 1 fees for referrals.
#FF follow him & download his new single "country girl (shake it for me)" on itunes, you will NOT be disappointed!!:)
RT : BREAKING NEWS: Hunt for a fugitive parolee in Leucadia who led police on a chase over 100mph before crashing. Live report...
The minute you rid the negativity in your Life is the minute your life becomes nothing but positive ! Life laugh love
In Jan, book carpet & upholstery cleaning in the same visit & get free home pro spotter & Teflon! Or buy 2 rooms Teflon, get 3rd room free!
No, thx for all YOU do! is lucky to have you on his committee! RT : Fantastic job on the page! Thanks for all you do!
As these school days progress, I care more and more less.
And then Aubrey was picked last. Please. I'd rather you sabotage them.
La trip is tuesday can't wait to visit some friends and meet some new ones!
i think parents to be should undergo serious psych testing b4 they are allowed to procreate
Dropping 13 y.o. off at the clock at Grand Central for a rendezvous w/ out of town friends brought back fun memories of my own teenage yrs.
I thought it was Either that or a Motorola Razor lol
come to the District. We have all the good food. And it's making me fat.
tascada shut up!
go up to him and say "I'm so fricken excited! My hips are clenched!"
omg Im soo done with antm! Its funny how alot of people that get elminated are doing way more. You or Alisha should of won!
THE soul is eternal
- thanks for the follow. Please join us at www.knowledgesafari.com
ah ik. There were a ton of cops downtown today, im not going to school friday or monday, in seattle they set cars on fire
little tech in museums isn't just about money - tech has to be implemented well + has to add to the exhibition
well, that was an immediate confirmation. it wasn't him. RIP to the other dude.
It feels so good to write fiction again. For the rest of summer I'm setting aside a little time EVERY DAY for it.
Every night I have dreamt of work. . . I have been working too much, but why do I have to dream about it?
Awh hi Katja! ^^ I'm good, thank you. How are you hun? :) & well I'm getting stressed and all but that's how it goes! ♥♥
Happy Mother's Day!! Appreciation for all the past and present moms who birth/ raise our nation unselfishly and lovely all 365 days a year!
Getting ready for day 2 of data driven instruction with 200 catt/ally educators
I hate snow. -_-
Expect your capo in 45mins
YES EVE!!!!!! #Wrestlemania LOVED THAT SO MUCH EVE!!!!!
i kno you'll never see this but you make my heart melt X) <3
Me 2? hmm... #HighShit RT i feel like i smoke slower when i'm alone
I'm in Bio... save mee
lol its in the bathroom
foo fighters, never shout never, the maine, skrillex... yeah haha what about you?
Well gotta hurry up fa work so later Twitter
There are three sides to every story
me too bad I'm in Chicago
Having fun? What have you liked the best so far this week?
lol I know that was crazy ! Lmao good shit!
I've been here before and I love it! I definitely suggest it:).
thanks for checking us out. If you'\re not busy this saturday, we're playing a show in sd. it'd be sick to see you.
Just watched Happy Feet for the first time last night. Did it freak anyone else out, or is it just me?
Hope she's ok & hope you have fun at the games!
just spent 20 minutes trying to log on to a webinar that is being held . . . tomorrow.
I'm not your friend blood, kmt you are annoying lil monkey
sorry to hear that you've been having problems. Can you let us know more details?
so apparently my step sis suppose to be on there....idk but I knew it was gonna be in mexico
If I use that SophiaLoren spaghetti people will just laugh and say You got THAT right!
Thanks for following - welcome to twitter!
sometimes you gotta upgrade that appetizer to an entree
Downfall of working a cash register in hot, humid weather = sweaty money
Going to Seattle next weekend if anyone has any suggestions on things to do & places to see. Let me know....
Howard is the man
Preparing for one heck of an amazing audition on Monday!
lol yo when i heard that hit i SWEAR i thought he died
The sky isn't always blue . The sun doesn't always shine. So it's okay to fall apart sometimes.
God damn it cinco de mayo
Stars and Hollywood Records
keeping the inspiration on, love you girls & us fans know you're going to make it to the finale #What'sYourFlavah? :)
When you jump for joy, beware that no one moves the ground from beneath your feet.
That awesome moment when you realize your phone cover is #glowinthedark !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Exactly! They are a total no-no otherwise.
RT : That blows my mind. HIV still carries stigmas in many sectors, so 2 see cancer as last pref is shocking
Funny TomCrean went baseball too today. #ChanginTheSubject “: ...send me one those #1 Ranked baseball shirts #ohwait”
D1 candidates just got asked question about underage drinking in a specific condo complex. Good times.
xo sweets, sorry if I got back to you but I'm in between cold and exhausted. Good morning!
You know you love someone when you want them to be happy even if their happiness means you’re not a part of it.
So sad I'll miss this one!
I always invite you! You just ignore me!!! Jerk.
#Imagine Zayn kissing your forehead softly and whispering:''I'm so lucky to have you."
You're never too strong to apologize and it's never too late to change.
Hahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahaha this shit is way too funny. Its times like these Bob Helms needs a twitter
High black boots and skinny jeans are not attractive unless you are.
You're not hahah. Don't tell me what to do.
Happy Birthday Pat..Have a God Day!!
Moshing like physically moshing in a mosh pit? :-) Cheers for the follow back. I like watching my friends' back for typos etc.
I was high as fuck & these cops pulled us over lmao
Your first call for help should be to God. 🙌
Thanks for the shout out!
's PAC ad runs clips of father & Grandpappy extolling his long support of Conservative ideals
just read a piece calling it possibly the best camera in the world right now, so perhaps yes. Will def post examples.
7-year-old said she saw SCREAM 4 last night. I still need to see it.
A rally on behalf of Trayvon Martin will take place at the Tennessee state Capitol 600 Charlotte Avenue at noon today.
hey! ! out of miracles already???
those look so god!
I was worried about Adults getting a twitter, but now its all girls that complain.
thanks, Gerardo! still relatively new to this whole Twitter thing....
gotta love the Rodgers' brothers.
feeling like a king and its all thanks ta my queen
Her story is awesome. So motivated. Weird that she's a year younger than me but I want to be like her when I grow up.
Sharks Vs. Eagles Back up!!
I'd take cups & a water fountain, ! But I don't pay $3 for a soda in NYC, and I won't do it in Milwaukee!
RT : You must do the very thing you think you cannot do. - Eleanor Roosevelt
want to know who your real friends are? Fuck up, and see who's still there
Words cannot even begin to express how much I miss air conditioning.
Happy Sunday Morning. Coffee with cream, baguette with brie, husband making crimini & spinach scrambler. Things could be worse.
Im now seeing the obvious.
long distance cheers! I'm just enjoying one as well!
Coffeshop, I love you, but you're killing me with this wedding reception soundtrack
I looked in the mirror and for once I said damn I'm pretty and I can do better
Magic tournament soon :]
I asked her if she liked black guys and she said she doesn't know any and in the Philippines black guys are bad.
Free free free! Come to Ecoclean tomorrow and get your cutoff shorts you've been running around #sxsw in all week.
That shit just ruined my mood.
kiss a perfect stranger on the cheek today; see how they react.
you know the #Mariners are struggling offensively when an rbi groundout is 1 of the runs scored.
madonna has a new sound out how do you like it? # gimmie all your love
Sad, it's not very good. Never have I ever seen that album. Wonder if Rolo has.
Learning to love well-written/educated literature again. I'm so excited about this!
uhm.... Not ur crusty ones. We only liked 2 of the same dudes ?
Thanks for the RT!
You are so sweet :)
Just had 1 of those awkward moments where u run into a person u only know a little but who is ur Facebook friend & u don't know what to do.
Enough rants right now, I NEED sleep asap.
I guess that means you made an A+?
The only reason I ever even turn on the tv anymore is to watch sports. What have I become?
lots of cops showed up to get a bad guy... Like guns blazin... Bullet proof vest right next to the depot omg!! Idkanythingelse
I like how I texted you and you didnt reply
OMG, I got noticed by Taylor:D I legit started screaming, Taylor is famous(;
LA High School Lacrosse . Congrats. RT : “: Got 2 big Wins for Crespi lax today!”
I have a lot of followers who are Britons, Ozzies or Kiwis. Which is awesome.
Go fly a kite, then come visit for your holiday gift shopping! Kids love books too.
All the more reason why legislators should be careful to protect what the state has going for it.
that ain't my style
"Happiness doesn't depend on who you are or what you have; it depends solely upon what you think."
I hate it when people say they're going to kill themselves... It literally BREAKS my heart... </3
Just announced! at The Shelter on 5/4!
Im at the point where i have two options- Suicide or running away
I know, right?! Give my regards to the East Coast- I miss it there!
Mentally preparing myself for this 9 shift one day off work week.
lol hush trick!
Get along or perish.
nada much. Relaxing after a long day of work. That sucks to head back to work for a "work thing"
Awesome. Still working on it:)
PortlandBoatTours.com is 40% funded on Kickstarter! Help us get to 100% by pre-ordering your tour today before prices go up.
I'm so proud. Got up at 7am and I'm actually functional! It's a miracle.
Working on the power point for Chapter tonight.
Aw, thank you! You're too kind. If we can ever help in any way, please let us know!
I might not be able to make that but how are you looking Monday?
Tequila twister pre game for Kulør bar? This might be the best worst idea ever
Night at home watching the best worst movie ever, Ed Wood! Gotta check it out!!
Whether you're tracking the status of a delayed flight, checking up on weather conditions on your destination-check Zamp App
Our FIRST event with the will be released on Tuesday! Stay tuned for updates!!
Yer god damn right, you did! Awesome!
#Bernanke feeling pressure from the
I have no idea!!! I'm with carissa& soon to be allie! You?!
I'm available if needed @ Sara Conte I'm Sag consider me for your project
Ive barely gotten any sleep last night this cold or whatever is makin me mad
will you ever do a song with ? #Ariana100Questions 11
Haven't most salaries increased 300% since 1974 due to inflation?
sweet dreams! setting off for ireland tomorrow!!
Getting sick
Deals of the Day - 300 Trucker Caps with a 1 Color Print $900. Sale ends at 5PM west cost time! customshirtprints.com
on the plus side tough I get to see Sissy for 2 days longer this weekend...this weekend thing just isn't enough time for her to spoil me lol
“: Regarding ur last tweet...yes. Open a shop NOW and put these in it!” yes!
Can I say this? I don't like girl scout cookies.
Check out our new delivery book!
Fuck this I'm out .
at panera bread with my family :] and yourself?
RETWEET --> If You Still Watch SpongeBob (=
Culinary treats from all over the globe at Chef Choi
I know u voted. Who did u vote to come back into the house?
Is a little scared of the jack'O'lantern
Can you PLEASE figure out my Uverse bill? Got hung up on twice "accidentally" by customer support. They'd no clue what to do
#GLP The hardest thing so far about managing my own capacity has been realizing how limited it really is.
Great workshop with Grand Canyon University the other day. They are a great school. Thanks for coming to SD.
Close to 4K fans! Share the Power Cosmic with your FB friends and share this page in your status bars!
people in the #LosAngleles #Fresno #SanDiego #LasVegas and #SanDiego areas, hit us up to help book our tour with
Tomorrow is my birthday. I'm turning 20. Woah.
I just finished writing a piece for containing my thoughts on THE BUNNY GAME, directed by Adam Rehmeier.
Can't wait for the weekend!
Couldn't agree more. :)
I didn't know you could grow facial hair. Did you save your mustache from the mustache party?
This may be the one thing that changes my views on that university.
Thanks for the follow! Love bags but backpacks are better for the back, esp. w/ my 17-inch macbkpro
Minecraft - "Survival Island" Part 1: Precious Dirt
I be thinking bout forever.
sorry were too busy to attend! Have a fun time!
I hate that I have not had time to read comics for about a month now.
just wanted to say I love you
Thanks to everyone who was at The Fine Line last night. It was a blast!
When does everyone get out of school?
haha im french (:
way off the target..
but hey the Rangers have a legit shot to win the cup this year & a Superbowl & Stanley Cup this year wouldn't be bad at all
there other factors but you'll see books written about America's dangerous sprawl patterns, just look at Vegas
I like to use the heat vents in my car for drying my hair and clothes.
Toffee Caramel Ice Cream, Hershey Chocolate Syrup Popcorn and Old Vampire Movies. A definite Tuesday Night WIN
Thank you so much!
What to eat when you can&#39;t stand the heat
Is it bad if I am inclined to like someone more because they happen to be Jewish?
yeah figured it was a non issue being 5 years ago but figured he deserved a heads up. Who you got for the MLE?
It is in your moments of decision that your life is shaped. Develop your decision-making muscles.
Early release tomorrow to catch up on missing work.
420 existed long before that.. I was smoking in celebration of the day when I heard the news :(
Can't wait to get to Wrigley
If the Gronk Man is out it could be bad news for NE. He's virtually the only Non Finesse player they have on Offense.
Honestly baby il do anything you want to💗
oh nos! if leaves, my chic-a-chee notification sound will be so depressing.
yo ill be in sac on oct 14th possibly we should kick it homie
It's friday! yay! Friday!
We may not have been able to enjoy a white Christmas here in So Florida, but we can give the gift of a white smile! www.kravitzdental.com
Two completely amazing events in LA this weekend...
NICE JACKED UP CHOPPERS!
WOW! Congratulations, Emily!!! In which branch did you serve?
You're hugging card stock and talking to your bagel.
Is there a sweeter song than Europa by Carlos Santana? Timeless.
Movies All Night ?<3 I Think So , I Got No Life :/
I feel bad for the guy sometimes
RT : #Salute #SALUTE #SALUTE for the support on your show on last night!
Goodnight Everyone ♥ Sending you Amazing love to you! Have a wonderful day and #HappyThursday! ♥
What's your favorite cover of ours?
it was probably some random douche cranking you.
Cyrus Hardingdescended deeper, throwing the light of his lantern on all sides
Why is he suckin on a pickle like this O.o
Officially a month since we been in the new place!!! :) #LovinIt Gonna have 2 have a housewarming soon!!
Maybe DJ and I could get married. Would that be weird and/or work?
I can't imagine my life without , I love him with everything I have & Florida was the best vacation ever <3
What question would you like to ask Tim Tebow?
I don't personally but I'm sure Sean would know at Hifi. He's from that area.
Busy day for we will have a company meeting later this afternoon...the opening is getting closer.
Love come quick, love come in a hurry. There's Thieves in the Temple tonight. Kicking me in my heart tearing me all a part.
ikr! But twitter is one of the reasons I get distracted and I don't do my hw
Ewww, I have a test next period ):
up to u
agreed!! “: Tattoos are too sexy...... Mm mm”
killed the value with retweets man - keep up the great beats, lose the retweets
D'Angelo's "Chicken Grease" ?
that song pisses matt off...but, it's not dead. we're just gonna pull the ol' arrangement switch-a-roo. it's a brilliant piece of music.
THE WORSE DAY EVER FML -_-
#pii2012 only the FTC representative is not on twitter
Can't wait to work with you! Congrats on your new position with
Down at Manhattan Beach near 6th and Strand among the madness. Come by and hydrate!!
Mondays are the worst.
Back in #LasVegas. I fucking hate Vegas. I can't remember ever having a good time here. Nothing like seeing everything you can't have...
Or don't text back that's cool. Not like I wanted you to or anything...
And trying too hard may lead to a fiasco like the Georgia slavery math worksheet
Time 4 the #writingsprint See you all in 30min. GO! GO! GO!
man....Eric is still cracking me up down here
ADD BOSTON! ADD BOSTON ADD BOSTON ADD BOSTON ADD BOSTON ADD BOSTON ADD BOSTON.. #1DBostonConcert 28
How are you spending your black friday? Let's all head to our local record store, buy music, and support local artists!
You might be able to use Automator to do it for you on a whole batch.
Working on the next video blog, who will it be? Stay tuned to find out!
When you eat with crooks you bring ya gun to dinner
Can Liberals explain the #Zombie #apocalypse. Zombies only want to eat our brains.... no compromise
Give thy thoughts no tongue. William Shakespeare
So excited for today's #crawfishboil at ! Who else is going?
#CreativeCloud ok that is sweet! multiple devices
Google+ fan, Share your pot on g+ and your page rank goes up
McCann is awesome, but Hosmer will get it going eventually and I will fly to that person's house and shake their hand and deliver cookies.
thank you <3
Life is change. Growth is optional. Choose wisely.
thanks for following! We post regularly about the fun programs in our as well as special events & programs!
Haven't had a slurpee in a while. 711 here I come :)
What if wealthy would be determined by the amount of simplicity that you achieve in life.
I know! Things are good. Saw Jackson Hole on Modern Family and thought of you. We def need to talk. let's plan a time. How are you?
I know , it's been forever !
Just watched Practical Magic with -forgot how good this one was- soundtrack is one of the best..Mostly Stevie Nicks..love
who's Darren Criss?
Amen! RT Brand Advocates are attracted to REAL, and can sniff out fake in a heartbeat.
boyfriend music video is perfect. seriously
Spring & Crosby, told the guy my name, he goes "aight J-izzle". I proceeded to order a caramel apple spice like a champ
Aww! Thanks!! RT just totally obsessed with you guys. After seeing my gal/lover in LB ... I'm was floored. Fab work! XO
Yes, but how are the schools? And does it have that extra half bath?
Catching Walking Dead on itunes. They just pulled a Breaking Bad-style intro
The #NFL Schedule release is the most over hyped event. I do like all the division games on week 17
proud to part of 7 Grammy noms.Shout outs Bruno Mars,Claude Kelly,Chuck HarmonyJon Jon Traxxx,Ben Chang,Make Moves,Conrad Martin,J Cole&Mez
About half (probably more) of my tweets are RT's
Big bio concert
Tomorrow night at George Duke, Marcus Miller and David Sanborn! Tickets still available 885-5000
i bet
haha i wonder how many are going to do it
Today's Soups: 3 to choose from!! Cheezy Cauliflower, Chicken Noodle, & Chili
NFL Offseason: Cameron Wake Back with the Dolphins Thanks to Joe Philbin
Sadly, no
Late night gym session, to counter those home made cookies...they where worth it. lol.
Where do you get your best curated recommendations??
It's pretty pointless if you don't drink.
Apparently, Combination Train has orders to run express to Ogilvie. Drama! Suddenly the music to Nintendo 64's "Goldeneye" is in my head.
you know what dad just fucking die
S#!T! I have just been validated by #DrOz that swearing relieves stress. Hot D#!
- so, as I remember, you are in florida. Am I correct?
Interesting as I've been unsuccessful in my search 4 the Bugabees 4 #foodallergy week!
People who copy other people for attention <
I'm taking a HUGE test today! wish me luck? xx
Follow your heart?
yes one time when I viited my family in germany..
nice hopefully it's in STL and you can't count us in we'll be there. ... Looking forward to it
Cooking neck bones, beans, rice n cornbread. Yummy
Nothing worse than a cold Starbucks! We go there to keep warm.
So Congrats to its been amazing watching you every week and hey you're america's favorite dancer . . YES YOU ARE! :D
KGS: Software is not a thing that you own, it's a service that you license.
I watched in America on today. He went to the Mustang Ranch. Oh my, talk about your sticky wicket. ; )
I hope summer comes soon cause if it don't I might just go crazy :/
Emailing Catherine to confirm
I'm looking 4 how ur 1st year experience compares to hers, but using all the stuff you've been reading over the semester
I work at nights. Gonna fuck some shit up at UPS tonight!
Silly politicians America's credit rating downgraded for 1st time ever even though you agreed to raise debt ceiling. Stupid in stupid out
Northwood University tonight! Learn and perform Eye Candy by & watch us perform C'mon DJ by at half time!
yep, sounds like fun too!
Out of $550 mega w 10s v AA. Then saw a good 50/100 stud 8 or better game & decided to take a shot. Never played that high. Up $1075 in 3hrs
The misery is over
RT if it's a "Tough Tuesday".
my computer is plugged in and everything yet it's still blinking red wtf.
Thanks for mention!
A day is always infinitely better after a massage :)
#inDanvilleVa The Police Sell Dope, Wear Polo, Fuck Hoes, And Suck Dick Too.
I need to go shoe shopping. Who's with me?
Happy Mothers Day To Momma Latimore Because Jacob Oh Buddy We Love Him!!!
Just so yall know, I was raised so far down a dirt road I used to think ASPHALT is someting wrong with your BUTT
lol. Glad you made it home safe bro
FL Rep. Randolph to run for re-election, state party chair
Not looking forward to a cold run this weekend. I've liked the warm winter we were having
Many thanks for the BtoB tweet and the #FF! A big #FF back at ya for keeping the thought leadership fresh.
hahaha mission aborted.
I am truly exhausted today. Time to mainline this coffee!
#FF Thanks new followers
I saw you at Gee Willies getting gas....lol
Bored as fuckkkkk someone come smoke one lol
Not sure yet. But we certainly hope to come to TO before the Indy #Toronto. Stay tuned for updates here. :)
dude listen to mountain sound by of monsters and men. It's a new song on their album
Independent artists have a dream and a perspective to share with you. Listen!
Every child has the right to drink clean water & breath clean air. "We have no time for the tranquilizing drug of gradualism" -MLK
I'm so excited to moderate Tips on Finding an Agent panel at #WLTYA Sat! If you're in Austin, come join us for YA writers only conference!
But, I'm relieved.
Everybody wanna talk like they got something to say but nothing comes out when they move there lips and mothers fucker forgot about Andre
The get a walkoff win and move to 5-12 on the season. There's still hope!!!
HA: Ladies. Can we all agree to stop hovering and sprinkling all over public restroom toilet seats? Keep it neat, have a seat.”
lmao i feel u bro. I'm boutta hit the store swear I feel like doin all tht though
I hate bitches who crack. Ight hoe, look at yuh self! U look like some road kill. Go look onto the mirror
make two dreams come true but following me nd 18
Oct Thu 27 Watching the Deceptives, Diffident Indifferents, Maybe I’m Right You’re Wrong $6
me too! W/ them tired ass church announcements!!
“If you judge people, you have no time to love them.” ― Mother Teresa
I am down!
I hope everyone knows that Ron Artest is THAT nigga.
It would be typical of the baseball Gods - after Gamel gets his attitude right, an injury. Hope he's OK, really proud of him this year.
me 2! asdfghjkl but your pretty
You can't earn the right to lead if you have not passed the test of discouragement!
My film "Just Like the Movies" just won the Colorado Spotlight short award at the Indie Spirit Film Festival!
I'm not the only one that says that c:
Just learned what a "cockloft" is. (Apparently, a tiny attic or crawl space.) If I ever build a house, I want one.
Saying yes to yourself may mean saying no to others. Shift your actions to match your priorities and success will follow!
-Gays, bisexuals, and lesbians get frowned upon but not someone who's fuckin' their cousin?
#in #BARS12...I am attending the Big Analytics 2012 this Thurs in San Francisco which is sold out.
Concert Review: Beats Antique Bring Spectacle and Energy - OffBeat Magazine
#25 Bro, I don't care what the world says LIFE begins at conception! #GodlyBroTips Psalm 139:13 Jeremiah 1:5
call me asap, I got great news!
Food Fact of the Day: Feb 21, 1931 Alka Seltzer was introduced. The perfect product for the end of Mardi Gras
Juwan Howard's still kicking.
I'm pushing back... foolish? waste of energy?
Tmrw is my last 2 midterms. I was,asked to study. But crap Im hungry & I don't feel like doing shit. -.-
it never gets old
RT : how many days until #BELIEVE ?
yep! It was just on the radio too! :)
RT The love of my life and daddy to our twins - - was born today. I am very glad he was.
very soon, mag is released tomorrow!
If I had it like that I'd hire a driver for the night. Then I could pass out in the backseat w/out hurting someone/getting arrested.
Whts going on with Wade ?
Playland is a go we got the good news today! I hope to see everyone there!!!! July 20th ~myspace.com/xforeverandafterx~
Getting settled in Bologna &preparing for the school year. Excited for research & exploration. Hope to visit and learn in Reggio-Emilia.
tremendous performance after tremendous performance! Your #TheVoice!
Hm, mine was "General Libraries"--kind of boring, but I suppose it bodes well?
thank you man. Much appreciated.
that's what's up my bday is 2morrow I'm having a bbq in a park you welcome to come
thank you for the write-up!
I need to be invited to a wedding so I can wear this dress I found.
With at Epicenter Cafe. A good day.
The three rules being a great player, practice, practice and more practice. You can be as good as you want to be.
I'm sad. is not following me and she haven't seen the pic i made for her :(
I self medicated with beer...all better now.
Los Angeles, CA: I will be @ the Country-Western music benefit gala 2nite. Come up and say hi. Bring toys and canned goods.
One thing working in sales teaches you is patience, especially when dealing w/larger entities. Takes time to grow your blip on their radar.
RT : Just now waking up...smh
How do you track when 1 person is very interested in a home online?
Call call please sinna pesa , I would if I could
Nyquil and earplugs are a hell of a defrag.
Torafugu Association (can't get fugu legally wo licensing from them) has confirmed we r the only restaurant in IL! Come try it!
Text marketing applications; RETAIL, RESTAURANTS, REAL ESTATE, AUTO DEALERS, CLUBS, BARS & PUBS, TEAMS, ETC. www.zesmo.com
Thanks Antonio
It is very helpful when studying. It worked back in the day and is still a great resource.
I'm going to be tweeting off , so follow :)
Nothing like seeing Gary, Jack and Arnie on the first tee at The Masters!
Funny how honey ain't sweet like sugar
do while I was at work I hear the song "fuck the police, fuck the police" & even the manager was singing! Lmao I died laughing
Oh hey snow. You're 3 days late.
Holy Crap! Husband wants me to make Falafel. This is the same man that won't eat risotto. Maybe he is sick, or someone stole my hubby.
Baby baby baby baby
why it gotta be so hot
Before you begin marketing your business online, make sure you have a clear set goal and the tools you need to get there.
San Fran needs touchdowns. Field goals at this point will be pointless.
never happend--that's Downtown's turf
R.I.P junior.. my prayers go out to you and your family.. rest easy brotha
Thanks for the follow!
Rondo at the buzzer!
i want you, but i'm going to stop myself from getting attached
If I decide to get the test then I'll probably pay out of pocket. Who knows what my insurance company will do with the info.
“: To nap or not to nap? That is the question. #storyofourlife” what is our life right now? Hahaha
Thanks for the FF! :)
I DONT SHAKE HANDS WITH SUBSTITUTES!
Are you insulted by their laziness or happy about someone actually reading your blog... :-)
Hm wishful thinking Angels but let's suppose saw this tweet and said.... oh what the hell corny joke Friday here we go #yea ...
"Yay! Time for Madonnas halftime show" -nobody, anywhere
Win!! Great job Hawks. Uploading 809 pictures.
pretty please with a 1000 cherries on top pick me
Did UK not watch kU film? The Cats have to get into their offense & finish at the line! The chickenhawks cannot win this...
Pretty good, thanks. Trying to get this next album finished. How are you?
I appreciate all the Laker fans giving their hard earned $ to the
Janet Simons' Agha Shahid Ali site makes clear distinction btw factual/textual and interpretive materials. Key element in DH projects
Don't miss out on our women's self defense seminars! Last chance to register, first one starts this Saturday at 1:00.
Snyder: new NEH-funded software dev project with students, teachers & scholars in mind
And I don’t care if I die poor. As long as I’m famous.
can i be homeschooled or...~
You beat Brandon? I question his skillz now.
Lots of time for tattoos/consultations today! come in and talk to Thomas, Berger, Dana or Dag. John D is also here piercing all day!
Started w/ a new company 3 weeks ago. This vacation is either a very good thing, or the jury's still out. First cut's the deepest?
RT I love riding a bike so that is part of my exercise program when I am dieting or not. Doesn't feel like I am exercising.
RT : That's the #Packers first blocked FG in playoffs since my guy CLETIDUS HUNT in the 2001 playoffs against San Francisco.
Check out our website! We have made it a hub for many interesting musician resources! Poisedcreation.com
Oh the image on your Twitter background of New York city. Um oops. Is that not new? :-)
I love Seattle. In how many other cities would grocery stores not only regularly stock sage smudge sticks, but also often sell out?
I was just thinking of you because I am considering doing something a little special for the MILFs & was considering plucking...
We've a very humbling new video out - it's a preview to a full version out soon. Thanks to Thomas, Ryan & Mike! C every1 next week. - JDG
You're from the UK right? Where's your malt vinegar??
Hey gf! Julie foudy leadership academy is following you :)
Many many thanks go out to all the loved ones, friends, acquaintances, and people that we just met last night at the show for being...
dc represent!
bummer. Good work, sir
Sorry johnny. I think D lee is possibleRT : do you respond to your followers....look for D Lee to be a Brewer
Dennis Martin~ Its the Brady Act taking manpower and crime-fighting capability off the streets.
Thanks Nicole!!
"Babe, we're about to turn this room into a sauna." "Please tell me how you just said that with a serious face." 😂😂😂
Huge thank you to #TEDxMid 2010 speaker who provided us with an update that was played during the conference yesterday!
so awesome! !
bro when are we chillin??
Is it just me or did the Yanks look like a tired step slow team tonight. Or to put it another way they looked OLD tonight.
#ExerciseInFutility: Time spent trying to teach dog Freida to howl on pitch.
And I always have to thank the well-named Mr. Sweet for his kindness, support, and affection for poetry, including mine.
Thanks for following ! Looking forward to sharing!
does this mean we can perform together in ninja masks? Cuz I'm down for that too...
I have trouble with the simple "Windows" concept--it just doesn't seem like a real translation to me.
All roads lead to Indy!
Boy shirts to bed >>
How can I change my account from an old biz I ran to a new one or just a personal account?
well, i don't want to brag or anything, but i am getting quite good on the uneven bars.
LMAO, sounds like a wild night!! RT : #YouMayBeALingerieModelIf you wake up and there are false eyelashes, silicone nipple cove
You still a punk ass cheap shot artist I'm sure would Agree.
Gotta new track for you guys tonight :) Spread the word friends!!!
Well you chose not to take ENT-326 with us so....
Really she tried to bring maple syrup. Bitch BYE.
it's mother's day people . Appreciate that beautiful woman .
2nite on CN|2 Sports: New C-J publisher Wes Jackson talks about new gig and how UL fans should feel with a Cat in charge of hometown paper
Watch them catchphrases, son. Don't forget the ™ at the end of "out yer filthy mouth™"
Chris sings harmonies with the radio.
Trust me , smoking is not sexy !
Come play our noon tournament. $140 buy in ($125/15). Sign up until 1:40 pm.
ahahhahah good theory. I didn't think of that. What about Asian girls?!
brunchin' it up. also: getting a filing cabinet, which makes me inordinately happy.
I want my fucking phone to work 😡😡
I just registered to #vote!
i can honestly say that i've never felt more clueless... a good lesson learned that won't be forgotten
Hannah's hot
Nice - Good luck with the next few months and let me know if you make it down here to #Milwaukee!
#FYI RT : hotspacho is a euphemism for ejaculation
Jus wakin up finna get ready for this interview.. wish me luckk
Good morning Twitterverse. Have an amazing Monday!
pleasure was mine sweet lady!
....they're not cookies?
we're just entering your fine state! hopefully you'll see a tour through OH soon! cheers!
Missed Dr Sanjay Gupta's Last Heart Attack again due to Irene. Will it be shown again? Or viewed online?
Definitely! We work in a creative industry and it is all about new ideas :-)
That's Elaine's reaction to Tilly?
Ahahaha , I'll Be That ! Omg I Haven't Heard That In A Long Time .
Thanks folks
A Weds? That during the day? Would do it if after work.
and how do you feel about fantasy/science fiction?
lazy day. love it.
you are awsome you guys are my favorite band... And you are my favorite singer... Cant you follow me please.
Start boycotting theatres that don't do something about it...
On behalf of Kenziee, Kai tweets :We've got a rare item "MEGU's house" on the way of Adventure. heehaw
“: TD, i just Tebowed in my pants”
RT : You know the right answers. You know what you should do. Why don't you do it? What holds you back?
National Kiss Day and Friday the 13th? So, am I getting lucky or not?
I keep seeing Google Chrome adverts around London.
Stay safe and keep us posted - praying that these storms will just weaken - I'm over them and I know you are
Early flight to Atlanta! Will work in studio all weekend!!! Still manage to tweet and follow! Tweeter is addicting!!!
Eat plenty crunchy fresh vegetables and fruit.
No worries man - Barring a monster game from Shonn Green tomorrow, I should come away with the win.
Affirmation: I'm so grateful my life is perfect at this moment and getting better all the time!
Preparing for 3-year old's Hello Kitty birthday party this weekend. The cake is rad, btw.
Sigma Chi is supporting the Sounders in full force Jimmy Craig is in the band and Jeff Hosking is the linesman. Let's put out the Fire.
Your Youtube Thing you Said you Had a New One..?
it's silly that they don't do a better job soundproofing hotel rooms. Thankfully, my neighbors checked out this AM.
Just made my night. Michigan looses :-) and go Lehigh!
I have many cool things to share in 140 characters or less. Like a RAD photo show here in #MKE that you HAVE to see!
yeah they had a song that was on lizzie mcguire
Enjoy a Re-airing of Today's World Cup Match between USA and Algeria (Tonight at 6:30pm)
It's my birthday:D
In Las Vegas! Up already!
...no challenge, goes down easy like Cheez Whiz or Kool-Aid.
It is what you make lil buddy.. Dont catch feelings or anything jus keep it
“The people who were trying to make this world worse are not taking the day off. Why should I?” ― Bob Marley
Do work!
Aw yeah party is finally staring ;D Happy birthday to me :3
thank you.
Great to connect Bob!
We all sit around in a ring of suppose when the answer sits in the middle and knows.
I don't know where to run
do you like Cody Simpson?
On-demans 3D printing by is being used to manufacture souvenirs and send to museum visitors' homes.
trying to get my money up so I can catch up to u lol
im so hungry to eat or not to eat
Oh, Southern Nights. Brings me back to the bus in elementary school - can you tell I'm a country girl? Well done, Blake
Unfinished paintings are more admired than the finished because the artist's actual thoughts are left visible. #fine art
We are running a Feburary Special "Free Shipping"
Thanks! RT : Good tweeters
I'm going to make raw, vegan, chocolate pudding tonight!
keeping score here! Now we need a Nuggets win
100 HEALTH SNACKS UNDER 200 CALS Snacks for work, home, to eat on the go and to satisfy your sweet tooth. I haven’t gone through the whole …
I'm not perfect but I do know how to treat ppl but they judge me witout getting to know me I'm used to it now all my life ppl put me down
Also, if you don't want a stranger going through your underwear, for the love of God please EMPTY THE DRYER! #damnyou #makemefeelawkward fyl
The starting pitching, or the pen?
Its so far away but definitely worth the wait!
Watching "Drive". Is it supposed to look/feel/sound like a movie from the 80s? what's with all the Gosling hype? He's pretty, but Canadian
I was sad to leave the Chinese-speaking world after 5 months, but at least I'm still in a land of 漢字。
Tempted to post it on the library FB page.
Finally started Mad Men season 4... I'm way behind.
Girls who always wants the guy to text them first <<< stop being up your ass were not in 8th grade no more shut up
Cool, please keep me posted!
And u can run whatever offense as long as you pay attention to detail and run it well, there's different ways to live life but live it well
I'm in for the Cody Simpson video (; sounds sweet.
I don't talk a lot because I have a problem placing words in the right order..am really that basic!!
Manning to Broncos
i don't recall doing anything. You got yourself in this amber. And I'm not in this, it's between u & Alyson
Just got the phone,
But I dig.
Thank you both for a hot shoot!
#DrydenSocial was incredible! One of the best tweetups, by far! :)
hey lady got ya salami where ya want me to put it ..
He was such a jerk. I watched their 2-part wedding special, and I kept thinking "WHY?!" is she with him!
it looks like it hasnt come out yet
Hi Doak! we started off the New Year in a new place in No. Hollywood! Rebelkins gets to live here too! huggz and have a great 2012!
Will the Higgs Boson theory confirm that the Universe is made of stuff that does not exist? A massless, energyless particle explains it all.
Love it! RT DC stereotype map: bit.ly/qL1QYm
Love never dies a natural death…It dies of blindness and errors and betrayals.Anais Nin.
Real examples are always best. Thanks for the great information!
If the Celtics get 40 turnovers every body in the crowd gets a free oil change. Holy crap hold onto the ball!
I cant ignore the fact certain people r on here tonight and avoid me. Youre too cool for me.
RT Playing it safe is no longer playing it smart....i love it!
you're to good for her anywas bro. Lol
when you text me << stfu
#GOPDebate #immigration says protect US borders not those in #Iraq, #Afghanistan 2012 no #birthright citizenship
Next time we have a war, we'll be using Facebook to figure out where the enemy is!
it's today haha. Joining the 30 club.
this is just what we need - more graphic visualizations!
Awesome. We will be live-tweeting! #SherlockPBS is so much fun. ^LG
what hasn't worked: teaching mini programming courses; telling j-students to take cs course; joint appt to cs prof in jour
I'm really mad at my twitter app right now I'll be back later to see if it will work well
Atlantic Stationn with a new group-I like these ppl!
I have the boy that every girl hopes for
Cheers - thanks for the follow!
I cant tell if im about to vomit or poop a storm. I just know I dont feel good
Is at summerstage in the frontrow Case is still alive yall! waitin 4 ryan leslie
i blame n the all u can eat tacos at his grad party for what my body is feeling right now...extra ab workouts it is
What's poppin man been a while, sorry to have missed NY Tech Day. I saw a post about it on TechCrunch tho. How you been tho?
BUDGET WEEK: A budget is a statement of values and the Mass GOP's message to the Commonwealth is clear: You're on your own
I wanna spend every moment here with you, you've shown me a place I've seen but never knew.
#liber2011 Europeana strategic plan, 2011-2015: Cultivate new ways for users to participate in their cultural heritage. Not just research.
LOL..I thought you asked how long Maxs would last. This one lasts 30 min on regular or 2.5hrs on recharge
Good luck trying to find a follower out of 873 people!
i cannot stop listening to Gillian Welch nor do i want to.
Really like 'the thank you economy' by Gary Vaynerchuk. Got to be genuine! :)
You Should Follow Me and then DM me you Number <3 :)
It was great seeing you too! Come visit ASAP.
Holy shit! Just realized today was the deadline I made for myself to become the white Usher...i created the deadline yesterday.
lol yea I just cut off al my facial hair
Dear pretentious Brooklynites: time call mommy & daddy to ask for some new dicks... cuz we're RIPPING THEM OFF TONIGHT!! BRUAR FALLS, 10 PM
(Cont) but its so hot here right now well for me it is lol I want to go to the beach so bad
Finially finished the 1st novel, now to start the 2nd., what a bitter sweet victory. Thank God the screenplays are already finished...
unplugging for the weekend: no email, fb, tweets, txt, cell, skype. kindle maybe?
Least productive 1st overall draft pick. RT Q: What sports record would you most want to break?
Duh. We're all in the same gang. Haha
Death is a promise, and your life is a fucking lie.
Added to the Advisory Board: 1 from a world class Woodinville Winery and the other built the largest Angel Investor Network in the NW.
RT : #SHRM12 is where #HR not only gathers, but is where HR works.
Wedding Tip - An at-home rehearsal dinner might be a great budget idea, but keep in mind the amount of work ! Recruit volunteers!
On a mission to incorporate my Kindle Fire into my teaching, any suggestions? Tips?
lmfaoooo well I'm wearing bright ass pink toms 😁
Thx. The weekend is almost here!
mine too. I blame it on trees trying to procreate.
Home throwing up ugh
Happy that Pres. Obama finally came around on the same sex marriage issue in a clear, public way - let's see if that's followed by action!
Too funny! Gotta love live TV!
Thanks Carmen! It was great seeing you!!! :)
On an #mbta shuttle bus from maverick to orient heights that got lost.
yikes, cannot stand some people.
Your UW bath robe was straight up baller, man.
That's right! Live it, Love it, Lube it! Thanks for being a fan!
Get better mommy ! I love you (:
Ahahah I wish mine was that simple. My mom thinks we all hate her and want her dead..
Yess it is (:
The fulfillment of ur promise n the palace is dependent upon ur attitude n the prison. Your prison may actually b ur positioning! - R Harvey
Introduce at #pubcampMIA were pretty great. Best three words: expansive, absorbent, lover
Watch Dante in the Overtime Concert @ Bowery Poetry Club Jan 19 at 10pm! Tickets are only $15, say DANTE @ the door!!!
A little break from recording...Hope to have my next single done soon!
my kids are playing a game where the 3 of them hide under my computer chair at the same time. I am playing a game where I open the wine.
Awesome! Congrats.
Just heard ...they are the cats pajamas!
If Baltimore wins, we are headlining the summer tour!
WHAT WHERE OF WHAT WHERE SINCE WHEN WHAT
enough of color separation for today.. Goodnight everybody!
Yeah I was like "Good luck with that....it's called a recession morons" I live in Seattle and can be just as bad here
time to get down and dirty?
Oops! Jay Michaels is the new PD of KDMX/Dallas, not MD. Sorry!!
Bobby Petrino's 2 week notice!
lol. If it makes you feel any better, Jory bought a TV last night
thanks i lovee how u tell us what is true and not your the best
info: if you add "of death" to something, you didn't coin the phrase. no, not even way back then.
Omg. Let's end this day right now.
Y'know, I'm glad I stuck with this Twitter thing after all. *evil smile*
I know, I own it also.
that borders on creepy... Lol
Say goodbye to Jersey, and hello to Brooklyn
I CAN HANDLE YA HOLD ON TIGHT LIKE HANDLE BARS
Looking forward to AFC half marathon!
Use your good for power, not evil ..or something like that.
Lmaooo or layers.....the best is how upset they get and the next time they come back the want more!!
Aw, You're so sweet Nathan. Thank you so much Nathan. You deserve best. I feel so happy right now :)
watched Cabin Boy over the weekend w/ my 5yr old daughter, we were both thoroughly amused. You and Conan need to make a movie!
my twitter feels complete and old and used (good way) with shawty mane as my backround. i am done experimenting.
It's absurd. What's next? Celebrating the 20 year mark for GW Bush picking his nose on camera at a Rangers game?
you tell me momma! Thur are not good for me but any other day.
I must sauce up my blog, apparently.
Wants to check out the new Seattle street food scene. Tako Truk, Marination & the Mysterious Capital Hill Tamale Lady.
HEY Do you have a Mother's Day menu you'd to share with the masses?
shit I been outta town making it happen, but I was checkin to see what you had poppin in KCity?
Has Snow E. Mann been viewing your LinkedIn profile today?
I know</3333333
Maybe it's the whole experience, I don't know. I prefer not to interact with anyone. Unless it's on vent, haha.
looked at making a nice dinner tonight but damn the cheese and sausage and crackers looks so much better. #easydinner tonight...
I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. The Lord has punished me sorely, but he did not hand me over to death
Melo Trade=Herschel Walker trade yet?
~sticks a cucumber in my vagina~ omg.
thanks! I really am sorry I missed you guys. Hope to see you around.
why I gotta be last tho??
P.S. For someone who's all about ze "Guiness," you sure don't spell like it.
Hey love! Haven't seen you for awhile. You good!?!
You will recieve an email today if you won, if not, you have another chance to win tickets tomorrow!
Is still alive?!
Taco Tuesday is on people! come have Shane's famous fish tacos w/ a side of pickled onions and mango-blueberry salsa
You give your community the strength and support they need to improve quality of life and they inspire you to be a better you
Come See Our New Selections.
I don't feel 15... Feels like just another day.
jason it was u d one dat told fake buster i was fake now y would u do dat 2 me?
now I want some
I was taught to make shit like this motivate me
Legally Blonde this weekend. Want to win tickets? www.popejoypresents.com/contest
HOLY SHIT my bro finally joined the Twitter family!Follow
♥♥♥♥Back at the church for the second service... dont think Im gonna doze off this time cause that nap I took today was AWSOME!!!! ♥♥♥♥
Lol, no!! One sister doing all that is enough! I'm not jumping on that wagon!
we're on for tomorrow! “: word”
Backing up home directory to install Ubuntu 11.04 64 bit. I have lots of crap that should really just be deleted.
wat u need
That was disrespectful of Nicki to show up like that after what happened with Whitney
no problem :) you should check out our music!
Looking for a gentle online yoga workout to jump start my home practice. Any suggestions?
nope...Chicago
Hugs to you. Family In Christ
um im pretty sure you're not
We are so excited to host our Auction for Action at the D Note this Saturday!
Is everyone excited to be back at work today?
thanks guys for the #ff that was very sexual of you.
yo do you still have the acapella?
that's the ugliest thing I've ever seen
thanks! I'll be thinking positive thoughts about you & & your crew &
i want pizza (;
would help her operate at her best. For optimum performance, and not for emotional reasons. Kinda make sense to me.
Fantasy Baseball!
#mla12 final thoughts: 20 minute papers kill the humanities. Sharing ideas over wine might be our salvation
I must say us Latinos got moves!
bad boys two..heck of a film...
Finish Reading "Bitch" dats was a good book! Now I'm Reading "Bitch Reloaded"
Amen to that.
i never left i just couldnt tweet from lack of internet
Great tweet!!
Hi - thanks for following us!
Poltergeist is actually my favorite poster of all time. Very striking.
Bouts To Put Some Dish Soap On The V So The Rain Could Clean It…
RT : Stoked to be back in #NOLA parked to get some pre-Jazz Fest work done. This place rules.
#Health #Tip: Eat before going to the movies. A tub of popcorn has 1200 cal & 60g of fat; & thats without butter!!
bro that's not true stop making stuff up
Hey , I am in a 10 team 2QB league this year. What is the draft strategy you would use?
yes I agree
“: Congrats ! #StanleyCup Champions. Way to go!” everything about new England rules!!!!!!!!
Ive fallen asleep in this library ohh i dunno.... 4 times
Dont shy away from bringing the camera out to play! Just saw great pics on Facebook from a dance studios adventures in costume fittings.
I am. Spamming the world won't do it... This is assured.
Er, perhaps you should open the windows?
The air quality is so nice here.
SATAN STAY OFF MY PAGE.
I just finished a 2.50 mi run with Nike+ GPS.
I knew you would <3
Marcel is tearing up on the keyboard!! Get down here and check him out...Brass Monkey West Allis 119th & Greenfield!
Idaho Historical Society 'Esto Perpetua' awards includes Basque Museum's Patty Miller & Hidden in Plain Sight exhibit - bit.ly/raEd3P
ZING. RT : then what does following me say about YOU? : all you tweet are useless facts of information
Dang i wish my twubby was awake right now !!! :-( GETCHO ASS UP !!!!!! lol
I am going to get one of the loli pop
Before New Years Eve Ends Will The Marvelous Mikey Follow ME <3 [: ? 11
Knee-depth in production at for the last time. This week's feature? Well, it's a live one, that's for sure. Stay tuned.
#Rampage and trade downwinders. Glazer connects with Herman to give the #Spinners a 10-5 lead. 7 mins left
Nice meeting you, too! Stay in touch.
ill be back next weekend. 97 marlins are one of my fav teams ever
so the Craig show is postponed, dgd is only playing like two dates of the allstars tour, and I'm not gonna get to see my favorite band play
Don't forget that we have FREE ROLLING ROCK TALL BOYS TONIGHT from 6-8pm!
You got #TeamJustinBieber in your Bio
I am a bitch. oh yeah.
sunset and berry creek to waterfall and back..
Sending good thoughts!
About to meet Christine Ward, Founder of Darfur project, who speaks tomorrow So excited!
#imagine you are watching a scary movie and austin whispers in ur ear "it's just a movie baby I'll make u forget about it afterwards "
hey im a real friend :( lol jking with ya lol
happy mothers day !
#Bahrain is the place to watch now in the area according to KT #McFarland to #LPR2011. Saudi Arabia wants Sunni to win, not Iranian Shia.
I feel the same way about myself. ": I have so much potential I jus be confused on which route to take."
A little too happy smh..an u messd up
I'm up too early this morning.
haha you said it all!
I made a movie about It's called "The Shittiest Movie Ever Made." It premieres Will you come see it?
I liked how it only rained for our walk.. The people who just walked into my class are completely dry 😡😁
Them hoes on Craigslist RT : I wanna chic that can do dis shit this lady did during half-time
#ThatFeelingYouGetWhen You high-five someone who clearly wasn't asking for a high-five.
Get your small business Saturday shopping started in today!
creative motivation: 1 of my rules is: Never try to do anything, JUST DO IT!~Ani Difranco
hugs and kisses
Omw to class to listen this old 87 yr old women talk abt sex
I am not even mad at
Yes yes yes!
Northern NM Wedding Expo, at Buffalo Thunder - Santa Fe - this Sunday! Fashion, experts, 10 Vegas trips ++ prizes. Free!...
RT : Employees are product just like athletes RT Goldman Sachs sets aside 44% of revenue for employee salaries.
Makes me want to rewatch those Frazier-Ali fights. That was boxing
Marvin middle name wait for it lol aww so creative
Another fun fact in honor of International Women's Day: In Sweden, 76% of mothers work, the highest percentage in the developed world
Tornado watch 10:55 till 11:20am. Coming from the Oak Ridge area. What's happening there Oak Ridge?
As my friend said, it's way too nice to stay inside tonight. He's @ Natt Spil & I'm @ Maduro. 10pm #patioseating!
what if it rains every day of co-captians ?
Purdon points out an erotics of the electric grid in Spender's poem, "The Pylons."
Happy valentines day to all
We'll be announcing events through Twitter for the time being. Sorry you've missed some of the recent events!
nope, unfortunately. I know people are interested and talking about the space, but nothing yet
Can you grab like 20 YP posters and a stapler and meet me at leaders at 545? I got $ for you
Shout Out To
RT: Tonight at 7pm we dedicate the new building. Come out and celebrate with us.
Thanks to the Little Treehouse and Philly Circus Arts for contributing to our stash of Kids' Lit door prizes! Can't wait to raffle 'em off.
Whoa! You worked on Carlito's Way??? I was first team PA. Did we meet way back when???
Yeah, I dealth with that yesterday. Amtrak Wi-Fi better than nothing, but it's pretty lame.
Tough call... could be a Love Park or my go-to which is the Franklin Square. Life's difficult decisions.
This rain came at the perfect time, tbh.
Loving Jimmy Kimmel @ the WH correspondents dinner - the equal opportunity offender!
lol girl nothing
Any tips on how to enrich your baby mentally during their first 2 years of life?
Y do u #Christian #fundamentals disregard Matthew 7:1 & judge that those not "saved" r going 2 hell? U ppl cherrypick Bible verses
just got back from the storm hokey game! Saw lots of FIGHTS! :) fell in love with number #14 he was so cute
Will do
um is it bad that i don't want my boyfriend to use twitter.....
Brett Cullen also played Goodwin Stanhope on #lost. Michael Emerson's character had him killed.
Irony--we would not be having contraception debate with real healthcare reform that moves away from employer based system to national system
u could've gone!
Mizzou wins!! Ah! Go tigers!
yes 5 food trucks in 1 place.hope 2 see you there!
yea I feel u 100% I didn't even understand where that all even came frm n I was salty bcuz we were workin on our friendship
hey yo no I'm not
Aisha Tyler -- "We love it, only we're not going to use it - It's FABULOUS - fuck no!" on Hollywood
This Kimbra gotye - somebody I used to know (solidisco remix) is possibly the nicest track I've heard all day. Thanks !
When the BIGS bring the A-game, no one can match up. Bring it home,
Matter of fact, E. I think #KC and #SamJones followed #BillRussell out to #USF. But, my #memory is dated.
thanks for the advice!! Maybe I should practice in a pool for now :) jaws terrified me as a kid.
Come on Ayala get us out of this jam
I still get butterflies in my stomach whenever I hang out with you.
can i have followers?
For those who have finished off all their Halloween candy already, come on over & we promise to satisfy your sweet tooth with our selection!
IKR!!! Just let kansas beat us up then call it on us if we look at them wrong!!
Nothing in life comes easy so stay strong, give them a taste of yourself, & show how hard you are.
Let me think about it....m SHADY
Let us know if we can help! We have a ton of scholarships on our website and we can pair you with the ones you are most -
Hahaha! I was thinking of that same thing!
The best thing about me is you.
Tried getting coffee before school and this bitch at mcdonalds gave me lukewarm bottom of the pot shit. Gross
I know lol
Hello Ms. Jessica, I hope that you are well!
Headed to later to get a celebratory bottle of wine. Our packaging is almost done!!
If you do + you can go on forever.
how r u watching it?! Ohh yeah I'm mad! Haha mad that I can't watch it! Lol more jealous! :)
I STILL haven't been to Vegas..(in case anyone needs a card counter, I have skills like RainMan)
Hey! When are we doing lunch?
killing it right now!!! These kids aren't ready for this shit!!!
Wednesday 10-6 Long Beach Farmers Market @ City Hall, next to LIRR station
we always ponder the small stuff and take the big stuff for granted.do we really care if the light goes out when we close the fridge
If Michael Bay made a movie about Michael Bay, would he then understand what he's done to the Transformers? #suck*suck=suck^2
Been masterminding all day. It's true..As iron sharpens iron, so one person sharpens another
You quoted The Ramones! I love you! <3
Gameday! Let's go guys!
#FF my yellow ninja
New earrings perfect for the holidays! Join us tomorrow 12/6 at Centre City Tower from 7:30am-2:30pm to see our new collection!
This is the first week I have seen these 3 words in succession: "alleged lottery winner."
": So joann gon be here 4 the 4th of july. Tombout she sleeping w me lol" In that case, party in the DMV area!
hey. follow. me. and ihope your eye feel better. lol.
I have purchased a flavor injector syringe. Oh, the alcohol-related possibilities. First up, frozen vodka Kool-Aid Jammers.
Deactivating my #FB was such the freeing feeling. That part of my life is over... For now!
I'm having the same problem. I don't mind getting rid of a few self serving follows though. More room for the good guys :)
Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was a tragedy.
Come out and watch the vs Miami game at 7:00 & stick around for Bingo at 9:30!
Why do i always wake up so early..
RT RT : I asked him, "Who said you could fool around with my wife?" He said, "Everybody."
k I'm done. lol
Bout to bring this hottie home tonight
Best Monday ever! Open bars, Congressmen, still partying RT : This is so ridiculous, straight crazy! Doesn't get any better!"
did my buddy get to come home
me too(: lmao
sounds good
I wonder if you really want to change like you say you do. Sure doesn't look like it.
re: our 8.50 meeting time: "Be there at like 8:55. I had trouble picking a cardigan."
Welcome to the North Pole. We make fun and games. Axl Claus is about to join up with #santacon 2011.
All you have to say is I don't want to talk to you. Js
Persistence, iPod and time spent in Africa. That's all it took. =)
yanno what, im tweeting jewish jokes...you guys that dont like it can get at me..yolo.
Happy Birthday to you!!!
House to myself again for next 3 days!!
#BuckWild RT : Don't want to jynx it, but I'm starting to get Baseball fever #OriolesMagic !!
wow i really wish i was back in high school right now.....
Seriously.. Who doesn't have "anxiety problems" these days. -_-
took a wrong drop and then I holed out from where I had dropped for par!!
mine good
Gonna keep that #PacBradley #FaceOff on the TiVo in case I have trouble sleeping.
i love you too baby <3
Now that my wife is gone on her business trip, it is time to initiate Operation Wallow-in-Filth 2: Electric Bachelorhood.
when life leaves you speechless, songs give you lyrics to find meaning...
Pucks about to drop at the Saint Peters Don Bosco hockey game. Gonna be a top 20 garden state battle!!
loneliness is such a drag ...
Done!!! :) heading back to the #260 oh how I've missed and my baby cracker 🐶
ugh, the scab on my leg hurts. lesson: don't slide into 2nd only wearing shorts
RT : And you had style! RT : Cruised the ipaths for the first time yesterday. I am satisfied. Stoked.
what u wanna do ??
The Bulls still have a solid team. Derrick Rose is a monumental loss for the club, but our bench is still mobbin' and our guys are hungry.
BLT's, strawberries, and baked potatoes =
that's sick man, ima get on that maschine asap for sure. shits gonna be
Double Dry-hopped Deviant Dales on cask - start your weekend right!
I'm moving in with Mel!
great wine... thnx for sharing.
Yeah, we missed the fun. Oh, well...we gots al summah.....
Really struggling with this time change, and I'm not a morning person to begin with... but at least it's finally sunny again :)
I'm doin good. Bout to watch some Parks and Rec with a heat blanket! How r u?
What was the response to the auto feedback? Better than nothing, wish I had a call, ???
TPB is the ONLY movie that he's in I can stand to watch, because the rest of it is so good.
are you talking about the Micky mouse squeak pot of hot mess? Throw her and her Xena headgear OUT.
I love my attitude do you...who cares bitches
WHAT IS SUNDAY
In the words of my man "I feel like a bag of dicks!". Allergies are the worst!
13u that is
Now everybody on Future...at first wasnt no one listening to him saying he lame and ish..now everyone and their gma listening to him..smh
S/O TO FOR PUTTING OUT THE HARDEST MIXTAPE OF THE SUMMER! #iPARTY BITCH! #TheNewChicago Vol.1
RT : #RL Jets have just announced they have agreed on a trade with Denver Broncos for QB Tim Tebow. <-- Ugh.
Just made me some money
#reebok need to bring the #iversons back......
There's plenty of dates available to book a home party, basket party, e-party or fundraiser in February. Contact me for details.
Good morning hungry as always
I don't think anyone realizes how much I want to just lay in my bed, all day.
I think everybody in their right mind does. Haha #HappyBestFriendDayToTori&Brooke Broobie told me about it.
(1/2) i'm so glad you guys are back! NLH is crap and their support is terrible. you guys were always A+ at customer support!
That's better than some of the other things I've seen people do in a McDonald's.
ivory but my chelsea got wait listed -____-
He Makes A Way Out Of No Way
We have decided to change our last names to Jada Pinkett Smith.
Don't forget to say your PRAYERS! G o o d n i g h t ! :)
good so far I'll be on radio chili at 9 pm I do 2 different ones
Not too bad, just been hanging out with the bunny and working a lot lately. Trying to keep busy. How are you doing?
We live far too simply and far too selfishly. We're ALL guilty.
I hear its mother's day in the USA, but not in #Nicaragua where my mom is at.
Can't wait for Anchorman 2!
if i stick with my instincts, ill probably part with my money
check my mentions ran it down
Pajama pants & sweat shirt lying on my own couch after a coast to coast flight. This rates pretty high.
ONLY IF I CAN TAKE THE TIME BACK.
ha. he told this senior that im like in love with that im obsessed with him and then tried to get me to talk to him but i legit
- Gonna shake Heaven!!
Oh i kno ma lol, im jus playin along with it!! are you single, or happily married??
THE lord Reigns, He is wonderful!!
Kobe pouting when theres still three seconds left and they need to foul... What a loser
give us 6-12 months and we will be one of the top westcoast online fashion retailers! thanks to all the people doing business with us
#ifyouknowmeyouknow I have ADD!! And I love it!!!
The thing on the news with the exploding diaper guy...*looks both ways* it's a MUCH deeper story than that!
maybe we can get a press pass? ;)
#Earthquake in Baltimore. Thanks Mother Nature for preparing me for my trip to L.A. tomorrow.
Ok, so i have a redeemable groupon, for house cleaning.. 1200 sqft.I'm outside their travel range.Does anyone want to buy it? $15... $14tax
interesting, I've heard the opposite from some students.
Girl you but if I tell you the you might take it to the head
Zen from and I are working on this together.... Likely means there will be more tweeting! ()
Cleaning out the bookshelves is much harder than I thought it would be.
I remember when I was little I used to feel like a bad ass when I listened to Good Charlotte
"#HealthLiteracy is the currency of success for all we do in health, wellness and prevention." -Dr Carmona, 17th US Surg Gen
Headed to SF this weekend! Woo-hoo! Frameline and Pride!
Puerto Rico tomorrow!
HOLY FUCK!!! I NEED THAT BLUE ONE!!!!! SHIT, I NEED THEM BOTH!!!!
#BackWhenIWasLittle we used to play basketball with boys. Boys still play, but with our hearts.
... iight I gotcha
I learn something new on twitter everyday but it's never anything good
D-Wade ain't never been the same since his shoulder injury...
Why do people tend to tell more information than whats asked for... Makes me sick jus wanna slap them and say nobody asked you that
I wish followed me(;
this is an old bird watercolor I never finished but shows my brushwork
Good luck this morning to and during your IE STEM presentations in New Jersey!
SequenceFileLoader internally uses SequenceFile.Reader which honors compression flags in seqfile header /cc
I thought about Monk but it seems very "technical."
when do you graduate? let's hang out you queen!
Intermission at Alice in Wonderland from at ! I am the Queen of Pink Diamonds with the tights I'm wearing.
People who are pro smacking children say, 'It's the only language they understand.' You could apply that to tourists. - Jack Dee
I have exactly 0% of my Christmas shopping done.
NEW! Egnew ready to &#39;get down to business&#39;
Just got back from feeding and caring for Mom's.Now it's time to work a little and review some tapes.
59 emails: I WIN! I rule the universe! I'm the Queen of the Email hill!
#ouch is right. What'd I do to you?
I'm fairly certain that Russel Brand is a Kardashian. But, I'm not sure if he's the ugly one, the dumb one, or the naked one. Any help?
Mornin', Twitta-Rama! Who's falling in love today?
You know you'd just shoot yourself anyway. RT : And here I am without a gun. RT : I'm just the messenger.
V is very very extra ordinary
you like it shut up!
“: love documentaries is it on Netflix?” CC will you guys be on Netflix anytime soon?
I'm surprised its just getting out, to be honest. Thankful they had some time before it was made a big deal.
Yeah, we may have 3D scanned SNL host Josh Brolin for VFX in upcoming MiB3 movie, and a whole bunch of other stuff too!
ready for Party Cove this summer!!!
EBENATORS UNITE! #EbenOnEllen ! LETS DO THIS!
RT : Im Recording... What you doing? (At Guitar Center on a mission)
The thing about inevitability that's so curious is the part that's destined.
Thank you so much, Claire! So kind of you to let us know-- we love them too! :)
ok I REALLY like it! But where will u were this shirt...
Great work in social marketing
About the only thing that comes to us without effort is old age. -Gloria Pitzer
thanks bum
A has a dental app at 930 but yes other than that.
I can't fall asleep.. I'm too excited lol
I did a photo shoot with them for Frontiers here in #LA. Love these guys.
thanks! :D
You are out-douching yourself this morning. Are civil rights a joke to you? A chance to be a jerk. Condescending, pompous ass.
Follow Me?(:
Good morning everyone have a great
I eat poop
hi thanks for following me, I follow u back. Let's tweet sometimes.
<3 ahaha I wish we could give ya a hug through twitter! Thanks for being so awesome!
Don't forget to carry the pumpkin
Anyone know of some good humor blogs or humor columnists?
ye you did thats why you just followed me ah=gain and i got that unfollow app...lbvs
awwwwhhh tech problem.
late bc i was in an airport but shout outs to for finally beating wolfkrone in a tourney... lab time as paid off man
RIP Don Cornelius. Saturdays growing up were prideful and filled with great music because of you. Love, Peace, and Soul!
YouKnowWhatAnnoysMe all these cellphone talkers who try to drive. Either talk on the phone or drive. YOU CAN"T DO BOTH. SMDH
Christians need to live their beliefs by not judging. Fairness and equality must be for all people not just the overly righteous majority!
The world can be a magical place if you just take the time to look
#PlanetGreen is showing "Wild Australia" and making me desperate to go there..
RT : APD and AFD responding to a four vehicle accident on I40 Westbound @ San Mateo.
lol i literally just started laughin at my desk at work.
Are you open to dating someone 39 years younger? Because... I'm open to dating someone 39 years older.
Don't know whether to laugh or cry RT Since Sept 1, 2011 the Red Sox have won 8 home games & the Patriots have won 9
Just two. But I have a list of movies I want to see that are for teens. Gives me an excuse to torture hubby with them.
if only closed minds came with closed mouths.
I'm fucking 31 years old and my life's in shambles... I guess I need to start listening to country music.
its ok.
It's been a hell of a year!
Still wondering when will decide to tweet his filipino fans like me...;(
man..it takes me a while back to remember all the good times we shared huh?
HA! BTW-The new Weller sounds pretty good. Amazingly consistent he is.
at least he had the courage to write a book, that started the testing for steroids. Now #MLB has turned on BB is clean
good morning austin!!(: i just got the iphone!! :D
RT : If you don’t like something, change it. If you can’t change it, change your attitude. Its no use to complain.
Success is the good fortune that comes from aspiration, desperation, perspiration and inspiration. Evan Esar
dude you guys are moving to denver?? that's badass! i'm going next month but just to visit a friend.
Being a writer means controlling words on paper...I always use reference materials to tweak my compositions' credibility...#write right
Ugh Philly. Stop being the team I thought you were in the regular season and be the team you were in the first round!
ugh, I know :c everytime a hawaii iconiac askes them, they're all like "i want to." & stuff like that :p
My swag is on point today haha
...is going to the Bread and Puppet Theater show tonight at the Dogtown Dance Theater in Richmond tonight.
MSMQ appears to be starting in on his promised "farrago of quotations", heading toward the end of
It's my birthday . And not one pertain in. My pethic life has said anything . Wow I guess I don't exist. Hm. Maybe I should fade.
Happy New Year!
Heres my number So call me maybe ♥
Orange dream eegees on point!!
having some #chateauSteMichelle #Riesling 2010 #wine Yum
Carl Crawford to the Boston Red Sox.. I'm not happy
#northkorea #kimjongil "I've never wished a man dead, but I have read some obituaries with great pleasure" - Mark Twain
Who thinks they have the flyest avi?
Loan rates have long term implications for students“: Senate Republicans block proposal to keep student loan rates low"
IT'S T-SHIRT TIME!
Is the Twitter app good? I am considering WP for my next phone.
phone calls from >>>. Hahaha be careful my dear! Love youu
Exhausted. Baby is asleep and I just want to sleep.
If I decide to put my trust in you, PLEASE DON'T FUCK IT UP.
At #DSum12 today w/ my good wife's blessing - ON OUR ANNIVERSARY. 1:30 ET marks 3 awesome yrs.
I really need my own laptop....it would be so much easier....
thanks man :) I knew we had something ;) haha
Will somebody teach me how to do this?
proverb 27:2. let another man praise you not your own mouth. a stranger not your lips. GM
"and let him go until we get our damn money" “: we are gonna kidnap God...”
#That1friend Who Always Knows Exactly What You're Going Through.
s/o to for having the cutest pictures on my phone. bahahahaha
Thanks for the follow! See you soon.
is so gonna win today ! Woo ! #stoked . Goodluck ! :)
PLEASE CHECK OUT THIS VIDEO OF ME AND COVER TO TAYLOR SWIFTS "SAFE AND SOUND" feedback and comments would be great!!!!!
I know!!! Kendall was tweeting about it today, that's how I found out about it! This should help Cody get more votes ;)
I had that with Chicago Code! And every jimmy smits show since nypd blue!
Phase 1 of a weekend full of spring cleaning complete. 2 boxes of clothes and 2 boxes of DVDs gone & donated. Whew.
ah better question is with them opening more brewpubs one in #chi town and maybe over seas will there be more DLD's
Kim Jong Il is dead!
This may be true. In which case help me out; I'd be curious.
Hackers Own Twitter and YouTube? Hackers from South Korea have been using
Fantastic!! That should be a killer performance.The whole city should go.The acoustics are amazing in the hall.Best ever IMO
Forgetting what day it is...
I hope Byslma just flips out and goes berzerk. Would love to see him flip out Torts/Lavy style.
u said your night went to total shit?
NBA: How does a No. 8 seed beat a No. 1? Utah Jazz&#39;s Devin Harris ...
On my way to get a good workout in at the gym...
hi dee/dee
people piss me the fuck off, so sick ofeveryone
Hey SamsBeauty Fans!! Don't miss the Best Selling Sale. Available until April 23rd.
today I got my prom ticket and suit, all I need to do now is get out of work o:
I'm just glad my depression has been very controlled lately
You can save time and money using Shopping Genie store software to find the best sales. Check it out!
Rhyming poetry is hard. Trying to work in "damn fine ass" and "Winged Victory of Samothrace."
i hate myself so much rn.
History consists of a series of accumulated imaginative inventions. Voltaire
what is with the paleo boys and eating Mexican before bumpy flights?
Austin is just so lovable. I could never, ever be mad at him.
i would always tell myself that i wouldn't date a stoner or someone who smokes cigs on a regular basis. guess you gotta make #compromises :/
thank you for helping us fight Alzheimer's. Great to have you today!
There will be none. No cupcake baking pans round these parts apparently.
Bryce Harper just stole home!
#savethedate 11/12, a 2for1 event: the Grand Opening of the Brookland Lofts as part of a Gala Fundraiser!
Just given jar of - fabulous #MadeinMaryland skin care product
All I really wanted was you
RT : I use MS OneNote to organize everything at work and plan on taking it home. I just really like the layout.
Best three grand spent evahhhhh!!!
Bad coffee spill right down the front of my shirt...but its ok folks.....no meetings and a half day to boot
Frankly my Dear Idgaf
Wait. Does stream live? Im gonna google. I don't want to get out of bed. lol
Gotta love field trips that end with lunch at Portillos
Touching presentation by about man's best friend, Google maps, family and food poisoning
GM is ending their advertising on Facebook because it doesn't work. Interesting.
C'mon nobody uses phonebooks anymore...and I definetly don't need 3 of them.
that is the way of things, tge way of the Force.
like ur quotes
I hear ya! Like the new name btw.
pictures please!
Thanks! How does Twittelator store the location info for its native feature (not the "link to map")? I couldn't make it update.
if i don't have a passing GPA will i not be allowed to join ASB? ;-;
Cheers! RT : Steak salad....cab franc.....Friday night!
thanks for follow DJ6
Bacon & Beer Fest! See what deliciousness Chef Sean created!!
Facebook needs these 3 buttons: "dislike", "who cares?", "are you an idiot?!"
Tumble Inn with ☺
Camp--my hiatus from art felt like a longterm love affair gone awry
any suggestions for hotels near The Rangers ballpark in Arlington?
While that was a terrible call. That was an even worse decision by Rondo.
I can paint your portrait, work with you on price www.leocortesstudios.com and email
it was fun! Completely anti-climactic tho :(
Had to change AsAp tank top wit some jeans wit sneakers to hot for a sweater and baggy shirt!
how cold is it there?
you cant go! Omg!
Almost to 500 please help.. anyone you give me a shoutoutwith get 5 shoutouts!!!!!!
Time to watch MEMORIES OF MURDER, an equally bleak but even richer and more compelling film.
Wait??? You think the #SFGiants are going to win the World Series?! :)
After the lowest scoring first half in #Gator #lacrosse history, #UF struggles to score as the second period opens. UF leads #OSU 2-1.
Ok, let's do this
do you Wanna do a tinychat with me
Thanks for the follow. Would love to send you a San Diego Bebe Eco-Nursing Pillow for your review.
I wish I could...she's not here anymore
Love that new song by david guetta and the video is
Happy National Teacher's Day! A thoughtful thank you to all the educators working so hard to make a difference with each & every child.
RT : You can always be robbed of what you have, but never of what you are.
More questions??
Every time he's mad I'm mad..
1/2 Being extra nice to Palin on the little things seems to give #Gamechange the "right" to nail her on the big ones. Her, her fans, and ...
Giants actually did it!
reasons why i'm still single: ✔ can't date the internet. ✔ can't date my favorite celebrity. ✔ can't date twitter. ✔ can't date myself.
alright buddy!
Autocorrect just tried to change "humor" to "hump" - thereby really altering my "humor me" text I sent my boss...
Thinking bout buying sum dem headphones by Dr Dre da beats ...wonder do dry got blu
CTA Blue Line needs signage to tell tourists "everyone else is getting off at Clark/Lake too, so sit and calm the f%*k down"
Damn...I was hoping I'd win that iPad...
No problem. :-)
I had to send it twice because I messed up in the first tweet! Haha gawd!
Hubby is taking me to see Titanic 3D. It's 1 of my fave movies, but he just wants to see the guy that falls and hits the propeller in 3D
Drinks drinks drinks drinks. Much. Needed.
although you may not 'bite' on the country tix... i do feel that a cowboy hat on your picture would look oddly fitting.
Finding the funny in not so funny situations
miss yours too. when you gone come turn up with us?
People really need to stop using Word documents for announcements.
Me too! RT : A8 Easter Island to see the heads.
An interesting campaign, isn't it? I luv it too!
Those are amazing people!! RT : This is an amazing pic!!!!! xo
The Florida Gators may have the easiest road to Sweet 16
how do you know it loves you? Maybe it just puts up with you ;)
We now have Ransom Old Tom Gin! It is fantastic. Try it in the Martinez!
eh hahahah. I'm going to sleep night!:)
Gotta root for Greg Oden but at what point is a return to the NBA totally unrealistic?
Aw, thanks! :) Yes 5PM cannot come soon enough today. Sigh.
so its not bad if your waveform isnt all fatty?
finished a pain in the ass Sprite comic...looking forward to post it sometime soon
Omg I'm hungry..
If u make me think of u one more time, ill forget about trying to forget about u #love dilemas
hi ellen! did you have fun at the teen coice awards?
Today is a very special day, a day to radiate love, smilers proud of what we taught Miley
Leaving my be on days like this is the hardest thing to do :(
what guitar strings do you recomend?
Nothing could be farther from the truth...and you know it!
you have nice balls
#imissyoubut you act like a legit retard.
I really just created this twitter about 5 minutes ago? what, im i supose to have 1,000 followers no? cus no one believes me..
As sarcastic and rude as I am... Never forget that I am SUCH a good friend. In doing the most right now.
While LOUSY is most often used as a synonym for miserable, inferior, or low quality, its early meaning was “infested with lice.”
so good.
The triangles of Moody Gardens still intact.
oh really :)
<3 You're the best! I can't wait to see you in Bham! <3
In Native American, the word “squash” means “eaten raw” but winter squash are almost never eaten raw.
u did on the email u said something i cant say out loud :(
So excited for #madmen tonight. I need a little don draper in my life!
Needle and thread are half clothing. - Spanish Proverb
Hope you called or emailed us. We get back to you much faster that way. Are you local? Blow off tube!
how come everyone has like a million accounts? i only have this 1 -_-
RT : "You tore up that electric drum kit!!" - Nobody
Any DJ who is up on their Tribe Called Quest is gonna win my vote. They gotta be my fav HipHop collective. Sue Me
The thing that is really hard and really amazing is giving up on being perfect and beginning the work of becoming yourself ~Anna Quindlen
Fed Law Librarians Conference, keynote: US Archivist David Ferreiro attracted to position by White House's Open Gov't Directive.
“: Good morning .:-)”awww good evening! I just aaw this
Absolutely Debbie! Send us a DM with your contact info, and we'll be in touch.
Great job guys!
Just got my ticket to the 2012 DNA Day Thanks, !
What's going on tonight?
Go insane, Go insane, Throw some glitter make it rain! <3 P.L.U.R.<3
Wakin up and not know that persons name is never good..man I gotta stop drinking
Reading The Stranger's Child by Alan Hollinghurst: the language crept up on us and now will not let us go!
my phone!! :D ive missed it!
well...you still look like one..haha but it happens to the best of us!
yea memorial wknd. n the next 2 wknds. after that for me
This has been an incredible season.
": You might be gay if you have an iPhone case to match all of your cock rings." My cock rings match my iphone though
a little more frustrated now
Tonight on #NashvilleNights: ! Don't miss it! 7pm on TV, 7pm Eastern online!
“: Russell Westbrook has ice water in his veins! UCLA Bruins across the galaxy are radiating...!” FTW!
sometimes you need real world division when you have students that don't have skin in the game #pubarch could impact long term relationships
... Naw, he has. I remember when he played Detroit in 07 I think? He went ham that series.
no seriously what does it mean? Lol
allow such injustice. Speaking out against an il informed government is a basic right of all citizens. Yet no one says anything is fear or
Todays MVP for the Falcons should be Roddy White. Great job knocking the ball lose in the 4th quarter.
I miss your tweet
Entirely our pleasure ! Thanks for using #ThisIBelieve with your students! RT : Thanks for the #FF!
Parlor homework session. & Where's ? Not cool enough to join #stillloveyou (:
Our Ubers are zipping all around the city on this crazy Cinco de Mayo. If you can't get one right now, check back soon. We're hoppin'!
Good morning everyone Had breakfast and coffee
Blue line has been shut down everyone
not much, just animating on a program
Two orange vested hard hats just came by to see if our gas stove was working like "normal" 2100 block Hargrove St/Penn St
Have 5 or 6 around here, some for years. Reliable, expandable but slow (whether FW800 or eSATA or networked).
cool. I'm glad you liked them. I hope you can get them autographed too!
#JustRememberThat I tried
You can stream the entire catalog (and buy it) direct from the band at www.sloanmusic.com/music
Let's get those runs back #Reds! Then add a few while your at it. Got a feeling we might need 'em.
as???? Yeah time to get outta lame Toledo...
Thanks Deal Wiz "CHECKOUT" Meech Dogg's JUICED UP on youtube. Please "HELP" us gain more fans tell some friends...
If the rangers take a 2-0 lead. Its bye bye devils ...
Spud Webb coaching NY team Ricks Stripper league. Can I coach Team Houston. Im a customer & all the NBA players go to Treasures & Mens Club
well, not in the grow-from-the-ground sort of way, but "nature" did give us chickens.
would you like to be the video for our band We Come in Pieces.. from Limerick, Ireland.. we know its a long shot.. But...
lol but what would it be called?...how about "A Cougar's Guide to Playing Kitten"
At #ShelterIslandMarina this morning with for the #PacificVoyagers sail to the #America'sCup races!
YOU DESERVE SOME REST MAN
curious to know exactly what's in it???
- unfortunately, "juniper berries" reminds me of Terry Jones in LIFE OF BRIAN. And that's scary.
we gotta rep hard
Hahah we are so cool!!!
okay perfect. I just can't do the whole graduation thing without it turned in. Friday would be good. Or Monday. Lol
Amen RT : At all times reality is a reflection of our sense of self
can someone els follow me
Sounds good! Do you have my e-mail address?
Wrapping up a full day of stimulating social media sessions. Now on to happy hour!
Damn is getting after it!
Apparently it's #ScreenFreeWeek as in don't use this smartphone to tweet while reading emails on laptop and watching streams on iPad and TV.
I don't know what I enjoy more actually getting to watch Chiefs practice or hearing and his wit.
Rockin reverb happy new year--- all you great artist ! love and peace to you lets jam and post , thanks bunches !
DID YOU GETT TICKETS? WHAT KIND?
Today feels like the longest day EVER
I appreciate it and I thank you for your kindness and understanding.
we can bring you lunch if you want. Just give us your order!
Bah! New forced hero academy update and no access to wifi for at least an hour! Screw you AT&T!
Getting stuck on a ride
RT Thank you! We are working to expand the services around the country. Keep checking back!
The Mavs do not deserve this Win the refs cheated it was too obvious!!!! SPURS ALL THE WAY!!!!!!
Can the world live without Twinkies? Perhaps, but I do need my Tastykake fix every so often.
will you please follow me & and I will follow you as soon as i get off following limit :) xox and can u also ship me?
I'm up
Who That!!!! That's Them Dolphins People..... Tonite It's Going Down..... Tune In Now.... Live
"Comfort and prosperity have never enriched the world as much as adversity has."
do you have any plans for a large-scale benefit performance for Japan earthquake / tsunami relief ?
I cannot even imagine how amazing photos of you in the Burlesque Corset And Petticoat would look. Photoaddict till the end.
The NeverEnding Story
i hope so. randy and hunter is gunna be there
Happy birthday man!!!
I've been burned a few times by the practice of 'texting all day, every day' with someone I don't know that well.
#teamfollowback --- I Always FOLLOW BACK
Super long day of senior portfolio presentations finally over. Proud to say my #JMS internships students were stars. Way to go, 490!
Oh my bad sorry
omg. I was asleep. it was al kaitlyn.
Booked a Sunday meeting with a potential business partner for an entertainment venue!
rangers look sloppy. Lucky to be ties.
Loved the reference on last night's episode. We can send another PhD candidate for Bones to interview ;-)
love you too :(
The one on your website under the "bio" page. :-)
Thanks, I'm researching references. There are a bunch of related terms also coined: food insecurity, grocery gap...
If you're a mother, have a great day! If not, I hope your day is ok too, I guess.
I hate fuckin up on a tweet and not seeing it till hours later.
I'll be presenting STOP! Consolidate and Listen today at 2:30 in DBA-102. Warning: terrible rap included
Are dialog and dialogue technically the same? I think of them as being different.
I'm not entirely sure, to be honest. Let me look up the info I was sent.
"Time well spent"
Ten minutes in and drops the v word.
OH DEAR GOD! You are too effing funny lmao!!
On this day 11 years ago I started my first "successful" pro wrestling website, who knew it'd become my career. Any1 remember wcwwwf?
Intuitive/Thinkers are rational and make systems and solutions to problems.
How you gonna act like that?
#Jerkin can't Die. I Bet he'll have your gr gr gr great-grandson saying " yeah Niggahhh" lol Happy Birthday S/O to
ok your welcome...sorry for the intrustion. noticed you're still enjoying yourself. Prince is the best concert I've ever seen.
I wish I had some sort of motivation to actually do something with my life
Standing on my car to get the live shot with slurry planes. Anything for good tv :)
So much fucking homework...so much...so little time
I'll trade you Brandon Jennings and one mil for Rondo!
Thanks for the shoutout A person that keeps their word.
Greetings Portlanders -- come & get your best deals on everything from your neighborhood vendors! 7916 SE Foster 11-7 Weds-Sat, 11-5 Sundays
#NP Usher "Climax"
STAY FOCUSED AND KEEP HUMBLE...GOOD THINGS HAPPEN WHEN U DO DO DAT
that's a good idea! I'm gonna look into that 4 next year! They should put me on the payroll!
I am never telling my parents about the existence of Powerschool. Never.
this week's Bill Maher is a mess
Agreed! Chili must have beans! They are the magical fruit.
Passion Fruit Raspberry Fruit Cake only @ Firehook Bakery!!!! Delicious...
At Shirt Guy Direct we provide only the best in uniforms, embroidery, screen printing, and promotional products. Call us 954-245-8380
NEW SHOE'S!
cause, you know, I obviously hate baseball c:
Isn't that a greeting in Philly?
Thanks for the retweet
Cranked out 450 more bottles of sirrop with the help of Mark McClelland, Mark Diserio & Miss Mims! Phew!
Will be great to see you again too!!!
At the UN Monday, Quincy Jones read from a US Agency letter about the state of Jazz written in 1943. Anyone know what that document was?
sneaking bites of 's sonic blast #atleastitsjustified #breakfastorlunch?
Of course I'm sitting RIGHT NEXT to junior baby son of a bitch who is already crying smh
Thank you for this report. Very helpful. "Magician" Dana Law 1700 miles so far. Next sec Ashland to Bend in Aug.
of course! be sure to keep me up to date on what happens with refinery29, in case i don't see when you win. :)
I know it's weird even for me to have random people talking to me about you haha it throws me through a loop
Funny things been happening all day
TheSyncMag comin back n a big way. R u Indie u should b submit ur music now. send album covers/photos 2
RIP Teena Marie! You will be missed!
soon brotha! let's make it happen!
“: THIS RT : A girl's pretty face can be destroyed by an ugly personality.” there is a lot of that on twitter!!!
You're so lucky :(
> love the sin,cos, tan rap!
Finalizing Mother's Day plans and getting all of these cards in the mail.
Ooh tell me how that is!
ppl be pissing me off
The tennis team literally has the best coaches.
Aw YEAH! America’s Got Talent kicks off Monday w/ new judge Howard Stern! Make sure to check it out Monday, May 14th on NBC 7!
Just got off the phone w. The mom in law. Had to tell her happy mother's day, cause she blessed me w. An AMAZING Man<3
I feel very happy just like everyday
Patricia Heaton, u 2? Guess I won't be watching "The Middle" anymore. Id expect this from Rush or "Anti Gay" comments from Kirk Cameron.
how's things back in kiwiland going ;p
#sla2009 offered most excellent wisdom and guidance on leadership and leading - from Coin Powell to Neil deGrasse Tyson.
Fucked up back.
Yesterday I got to pet a tiny kangaroo. It's exactly as amazing as you imagine.
Would sighing moss be TT way of sticking it to Favre
PWEASE FOLLOW ME, TURQUOISE IS MY FAVORITE COLOR (:
you two girls, are crazy.
you too! Looking forward to it...
hi mama :)
OK, which team's defense will completely break down tonight? #Pens or #Flyers?
Congrats to for officially deciding to go to Miami of Ohio next year!
A pleasure, Allan :)
Ight I'm done.
Every time I hear that someone wrote/writes for Vice, I just assume that they are garbage wrapped in skin. Good read tho.
I think I'm disproportionally excited to use this 3 dollar Great Clips coupon
we are talking about going to Kentucky next yr for the derby just to say we were there
Sometimes, it seems as if music radio stations pick 10 songs & play them on repeat all day #DamnItsTrue ~ this why I stop listening 2 radio
and just like that, traffic is moving again. what a mess!
None of the spider tweets were a joke.
Blue Cheese. I Love You.
Any chance of adding something like circles? Want easily organize my tweeps into different categories. Lists suck.
It's a fever ray sort of day
I can't wait till you come here! When we come to Chicago for the day, just come back and live with me! K? Thanks!
I should probably stop saying tautology so much
Its all good holly! Love u on the talk. Glad to see you on there
We don't need to win 4 games. Just 1 game 4 times.
I can feel my summer freckles coming in. -kc #summersummersummertime!
We hope you enjoy it! :D RT : Monicals for lunch with the parents. Never been here haha
You've been trying to get him to say that for 3yrs 😉 “: "Same-sex couples should be able to get married."
Watching WWF's greatest rivalries. Bret hart vs Shawn micheals. I hate the WWE but I can watch the stuff from the 90's all day long.
Chuck Finley “: Which pitcher holds the record for most wins as an Angel? Reply within the hour & use
don't cry lol
Why is it that all my downloads from Smashwords go to my computer and not my KIndle?.
GM' such a beautiful day' enjoy your day with the love one ! Happy Mother's day !'
“: So if Donovan McNabb is worth $78 million, what is Michael Vick worth?” 3x that
Happy Thanksgiving from Prevent Blindness America!
Nice! Congrats to him. I still want to run with Tyson someday, have him call me if he ever needs a sub.
Needed a break from work, watched 10 minutes of "Maury". It's a feel good show. I Feel good I don't know anybody on that show!
"pussy so good, he can't even PRONOUNCIATE" not a real word mama...
A blessing in disguise the UConn game isn't airing in SD? I can't even take watching the gamecast on my phone.
do you have a board???? I only have one other member in my all girl sk8 crew we need more
Thank you!=) You can check out our KOSE Sekkisei Excellent products too for great price drops! Have a great day!=)
I opposed Miller Park funding I would surely oppose a state fined game...especially when those kick starter suckers exist!
like i give a fuck.
Hi I am Brianna I am 11years old and I love to sing dance act to and play with my friends
Life is for service - Fred Rogers
I used to lie in bed in my flat and imagine what would happen if there was a zombie attack
Friday nights are no longer what they used to be. Growing old.
It's almost unbelievable, right? There are just so many layers to the whole thing.
Favorite=Like Button LMAO
Would be awesome if there was wifi for the non-hotel guests attending #flacon2012...if there already is let me know ;)
The only progress I've made so far is sweeping up the flower petals under my window...
Wow... Lol! RT Wait wait I am hearing voices they are saying can't quite make it out ,ooh yeah got it Slap A Hater
When the person ur talking 2 stop doing everything it took 2 get you...
a lot of our best #ravens are #Bama boys...
Fuck Barlow and their stupid ass fucking set list today. They are all so stupid. Why don't you just get off of our
I feel like breaking down...
Only a fool fails to prepare for that which is inevitable.
I didn't say it was good. Romney's campaign team said it was a good idea.
oh cool. (: and no, i don't. i have the orignial DS.
Rockin the valentines day boxers!
sure how can i enter?
Thank you :) I heard Whedon made all the difference. I enjoyed the bits of humor.
Thinking of taking a cooking class at at Bayshore Any reviews? Yay? Na?
You killed it!!! Remind me of Chyna White, but BETTER!! You did your thing!!
R.I.P. GRANDPA MANUEL AND HAPPY BIRTHDAY!!! We love and miss you!!!
got some drink in my cup now lol
I JUST DIED!!
Hey Everyone! We're on now! Add "Speakaboos1" to your friends list!
I love gossip BUT ppl need 2 just walk away & give her space + privacy. Leave her B. Her personal life is hers not medias!
I'm still tryna recover from aquagirl/sweetheat too 😳
52% of mobile app sessions on iOS & Android are Games. Next is Social 22%. Indie games dominate iOS & Android RT
Si Senor in Seven Hills is the best named Mexican restaurant. Muy Bien must have been the second choice
Prepping for a busy weekend with two vocal performances scheduled, along with prep for a meeting with an ad agency! God is SO AMAZING!
^es Thanks for the connect
send me your email and i will send you some pics of what we have and the prices on them. Thanks for the follow!
definitely ccm. She was from american idol i think.
That's sweet!
....I voted for PRINCE MONGO 4 MAYOR 2day! Make sure u vote for him too!
Happy Birthday to my Mother's Day Present...Karly Q! 11 Today! Whoa. Time to Celebrate, Little One. :) We Love You!
I'm a Hobbit reader too. They're also making a production of another favorite, The Runelords. vote on actors
We are so proud of the ladies from Hollins U for not giving up.
Step Brothers is like the best movie ever
of course I have. Received word that i'd see my refund in 7 days on 2/22. So far - over two weeks later- nada.
I would go with "the greatest"
Good morning cousin! :)
clarification - Yahoo is selling delicious to Avos, thus I transferred to Avos. Privacy info looks okay to me, what concerns u?
I just had a massive nap
. Hurrah huzzah! So glad you like it. Hope NM's geeks & uber-fans will flock to your shelves for it!
Do u like him?just won know?
Shooting an interview with David Kipen today for my doc, "Literary L.A" at Libros Schmibros in Boyle Heights.
you are quite right about that...we gotta keep up with time :)
it's ok, :) I'll tell the other guy why you left ok? you aren't coming back right?
Cody i am a huge freaking fan of you and i think your so cute just please tweet me back :))
"Go confidently in the direction of your dreams, Live the life you have imagined!" TGIF Have A Great Day!
Doh! My overly trite point: it should have been so obvious to the devloprs that a trite tweet could point it out.
CALL ME :3
Gunna KILL myself ;(
Were going to chase you down for a quick session next time!
Society is like a child that displays its emotions instead of accepting the truth
Zachary Scott Turner #ZST Rest.In.Peace.<3
great advice!
Bring in the end of the bench! This is what you call a ROUTE!!! #GORANGERS!!!
Nothing says, "I don't care," quite like a birthday text.
Want to apply Heat transfer label on the t-shirt neck contact
I Was Not Hype To Turn 16. Haha!!
RT : A #Cancer hates when people complain too much.
Idc what ayone says , because their is a reason for every thing I do ! So stfu .
what happened to you? You used to be so cool in the 80s
yeah that too! Ha!
Stay tuned. Podcast coming soon.
But yeah ima need the homie "Smooth Sailing" Chopped & Screwed
RT You can tell a lot about someone by their Twitter profile. If every tweet is directed at a famous person, he's a douche.
No Doubt
Get ready for Spring with a Hair Service at Blow Downtown! Free deep conditioning treatment when you book a color service! (702) 588-8456
I jus woke my daughter up.out her sleep shh its ok bby nite nite
haha;) oh hey is there greenwood game tonight?
Easy to say when you're going to sell millions of units, innit
(Part 2) It sounds like a browser issue. Make sure your browser is up-to-date or use a different browser to see if it helps!
Campaign for clean energy data centers MT : #Greenpeace Shames #Apple With Fake Window Washing (via )
Taking Thomas to his first yugioh tournament. #greatestmomever?
Have you ever said, or heard said, the word "temblor"? Or is it just one of those words that only appears in news stories about earthquakes?
got you. When I get another program ima have smthn for you.
RKG - why attribution is important: users touch multiple channels; channels behave differently & some tend to come before or after others
Hyped about getting my liscence
Today is a good day.
Most people spend their time trying to find someone to sleep with instead of finding someone worth waking up to. #Back2bed #ImOut! Ha
In the immortal words of Ice T: you played yourself.
Thank you for your support!
Happy Birthday My Friend!
Thursday's are free admission days at BAM! Plan to come in this week to see Ray Baldino's and Clyde Butcher's black and white photography!
I don't know! I got it in a bin labeled "Solenoid (5 VDC) NO DATA" from Tanner Electronics
oh i
Fine Fine Fine #Sexy Chocolate
In my "lunch" break at work.
Can iGet A Refill ?
Leaving for #Beijing tomorrow... No Twitter, no Facebook for a few days. So thankful i can still play #WordsWithFriends in China though!
thanks! which one you going to go to?
I like wine, especially when someone else is driving me home :)
Yikes I bit my lip and now its bleeding !!!! -____-
haha y'all both little!
magic, bird, Jordan
if the pit don't get ya then the pendelum will.
It's time to listen to Check Your Head.
Thanks for the love. Right back at you!
#LTBroadcasts "The french are building a huge and mysterious series of fortifications along the German and Italian boundaries" (5/1931)
Good morning twitterlites, its time for improv
Shared a cab with from airport to #soslam -- he is genuinely friendly & personable.
haha well I have an A in that class anyway, and knowing her manipulative ass she'd probably sneak her way into making us lose!
I'm not ashamed u see my bio! Use 2 like her now hate her
Reading, "Criminalizing Crisis: The Criminalization of Homelessness in US Cities" National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty, 11/11.
"Faith is taking the first step even when you don't see the whole staircase."--Martin Luther King, Jr
Phil says, don't ask a question just to make a statement! Words to live by!
waddup Tony De!! If you have some girls that wanna come thru let them know wassup fa sho.
Looking forward to the start of #ALFA2012. Visit Stanley Healthcare Solutions at booth 1003!
all is good Eddie but I miss my US friends!
I am obsessed with British TV recently. Downton Abbey and The IT Crowd are way better than Two and a Half Men.
Son of a Campana. He should ALWAYS be able to get that bunt down.
#neworleans #finalfour We have bought the entire in the French Quarter and we still have some king rooms left.
Hey, it was nice meeting you at the event last week. Crazy how we recognize people by who we follow on Twitter.
Talladega Area Walmart Stores Offer NASCAR Driver Appearances, Authentic Merchandise, Fan Events Starting May 3
Yes and...A great day to you!
Crap crap crap crap crap! I've got a party to go to that night out in the burbs. Will you be there other times?
Thornton,Denver in that region I'm goin to see jacob
love u back
the credit business has turned into a rackett to a degree; thanks for the follow
I'm under a very, very similar crunch. Gotta have this house clean/painted before an 83-year old Asthmatic visits on the 1st.
gyeaaaaa. I know you gon do it.
All-hands meeting preparing our #iPad launch events. We're hoping #ripple is among the top 100 apps at launch. Fingers crossed!
I swear guys, if I ever start sounding like a raging douchebag on my Twitter, ration my use of @ and
Slow it down, slow it waaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaayyy down ... Sleep/Bong/King Tubby-dub down. :)
#20topfavouritesongsever Fiona Apple - Sleep to Dream
Rolling In The Deep
LMAO! U crack me up.
a reality tv show called "my mom is obsessed" / the mother's obsession? "freedom"
This is so stupid!! why say that!?
This class is SO boring !
it's a pleasure, glad you liked it 
talks about how important it is to decide where to put one's time, but these choices can be quite complicated in practice
*love* the new look!
"no, the one with the pig nose" -____- you're kidding me, right?
Enjoy baking something other than brownies when I have the chance. Will try some of your cupcake recipes.
What hours do we have?!
We got raised on the turn? Fold -JC
you as well!
I wish. I would say OR after work. 5:30ish? Uncle Floyd you're invited too.
Great Career Transition Workshop group this morning -- 8 job changers with impressive professional and personal backgrounds.
John, we nd ur support. This campaign empowers parenting teens 2 continue their education & make safer decisions. Pls share.
got out the red bull. apparently it's ketel one o'clock!!
My iPhone doesn't like the word "boobs"
If my heart was a house you'd be home <3
His game plan: "Oh shit, I have to give a speech about how awesome Shitty Light is. Better throw them a bone."
#FF love bc now that voting is almost over for Shortys I'm happy w 11th place + hope Mud Baron beats the boy band
No problem. Glad to hear you're enjoying what we're brewing. Cheers!
Thank you!
Grrrr! You sprained your ankle? That sucks! I would be really mad cuz I skateboard so I need my ankles! LOL :3
What an amazing day in Tucson. Going to cool off a little the next few days before it heats back up. Great time to get ready for the fall.
The breakfast club is on. :D
#SnapbacksAndTattoos S/O to my fam and Driicky! On Board!
The church let out looking like a party let out lol
one of my friends almost died retweet and comment if u would pray
A lot of those little things that I really like doing are just moments of cool articulation
I see u boyeee!!! Keep grindin'
Ew I should of straightened my hair.
Lemonaide & sweet tea blended..
University of Wisconsin gets their time now, their second consecutive appearance.
Oh man, the SCTV era of our fliers was pretty rad!
I could sit here and watch classic Looney Tunes all day long.
Let's make sure we do one together!
so who's invited??!!
For the man having an affair with his wife's sister, cause, well, it's just easier.
God people annoy me with the want of attention and not shutting up over stupid nonsense.
waffle loyalty=waffle royalty
I've found a few places here that sell Stone, but nothing compares to the mecca in San Diego. See you there in Feb!
Raw aesthetic gets a luxury relocation - The National
Responded to FIRE @ 718 E 232nd St, Bronx, NY 10466 and helped 5 Residents. Red Cross auto update.
Hey, happy to hear it!! Thx for the feedback!!
nice, I'll have to check it out. I'm getting ruffus wainwright new cd.
Work not worm pfffffffft
so is Justin Bieber the father of the baby cause they never said if he was after the test he took to prove he was the father.... um :-\
Natalie imbruglia just came on my shuffle...
First, a burger with and at the ! How blucy is your lucy?
my mom took my phone don't call!!!!!!!
I use fabric. Wrote a layer on top to manipulate remotely or locally :)
"Obstacles are what you see when you take your eyes off the goal"
oh damn lol what U doing all the way over here in KC ? Just visiting family ?
I have a reality show idea in the works. Anybody out there interested in hearing it? let me know
bhahahahha poor you :P
I have been voting all day!
This girl in the studio has butt implants gone wrong swear I thought she had a pillow in her skirt smh gunna try and get a pic lol
Just like a car needs to be tuned up for better performance so does the body and mind. Give reading and exercise a try.
YUMMY WHOPPER!
Heather omg do u realize I had *just* deleted socstardom twitter acct like 1 day b4 u tweeted this! LOL
episode 15 it was. It's not finale
Perfect weather for #Christmas shopping in #NYC !
With my main bitch !:)
Always try to maintain a high level of motivation and spirit by remembering the reasons behind your painstaking to lose weight
for the boyfriend one she said 'stranger danger' and for the love one she just said 'im sorry ._.' I send her hella more tho! xD
The waiting game its all it is and I have more patience than a pregnant lady!
Booyah! Who just usurped Rusty Jenkins as mayor of the methadone clinic on Foursquare? ---> This guy!
I would still bet Greg Oden and the win a Championship before OKC.
I love you austin
Thanks, Joanna!
I'm not sick...well mentally yes, but its more of a physical thing. Not a psychic thing. Which I am both.
Those look awesome!:)
I miss u in class today :,(
Half way through season 2 of Mad Men. I've got a long way to go to catch up. *sigh*
nothing we haven't already heard.
Tune in tomorrow morning to Vancouver radio morning show at 9.50am!!! Im going
you are now aware that when you swallow, you hear a weird noise..
Pop-tarts and water for breakfast
when is City of Lost Souls coming out? Cant wait!
Totally just won a contested lien strip with a very adversarial creditor. PLEASED WITH SELF.
following u if u r a Mom Happy Mothers Day
I blame the wave.
Me & the Rza connect
Andrea Cabral on Romney's Obama strategy: It's straight out of Karl Rove playbook. Take ur enemies strength & turn it into their weakness
God forbid you have to walk a mile in his shoes, then you really might know what its like
why you so BEAUTIFUL, im jealous :) !! i hope to meet you 1day !! lots of love<3
my highest score is 771,480. BEAT THAT. (:
u guys play cypress creek tuesday?
Just now waking up and all I want to do is sleep because I feel so sick. 😷😨
I miss the old degrassi.
In the last 365 days, how many Biz Opportunities have you been apart of? Its time to get serious.
Looking for a sooper deep V for this weekend
I love getting sunburnt on my lip and having a huge blister. It's my favorite.
I stuck to my guns. I didn't join and Vic for beers.
seriously man -_-
Guns N Roses @ HOB Orlando $101/ticket. A lot of money to pay to wait for Axl to show up two hours late. Bad photo contract too.
Starting a new painting that is a totally different direction than I've ever gone before.
haha I knew someone would ride by and be like "what in the??" ha but thank you everything is fine :)
Wherever you go, and whoever you see, you can now tell people to #text your name to 90210, the most recognizable #shortcode in the world.
got homecourt tonight and the way the boys played tonight makes me and my project calendar smile!
Can't do Montpellier either - y'all have a great time - Laissez les bon temps rouler! xoxo
A snarky part of me wonders where the lightning sculpted glass figurines are.
thanks too & gonna play some
Voted absentee. Mailed it. Awesome.
The NBA without brad miller just isn't right.
What are you doing about the Portland Beavers ballpark? We want them back in Portland for the 2012 season!
Getting away! Definitely. Everyone needs a mental break as well as some Vitamin D.
Nope, but it works today! thanks ^KG
Finally recovering a bit from an amazing (but long) night at #wurelay12. Thanks to all my friends and family for your support!
If God is no respecter of persons, then WHY are we?
It's perfect weather. I love the smell of crisp new England air on a spring morning mixed with the sun on my face.
See ya 105 temps! RT At San Antonio airport. Portland, ME/Cape Breton/Prince Edward Island/Acadia NP adventure about to begin.
Power Yoga on Magazine Street tomorrow at 7:00am. It's worth the effort.
back in town ! Out to lunch tomorrow TDameritrade and Towne centre drive!
entering contest :) because im too broke to buy stuff xD
Going to see Kink Ador tonight! Be safe and have a great time you all!
Great fly day! #MSL launched safely, great am NASA TV! Morning hike: grebes, whimbrel, mergansers, BRPE, porpoises, scoters
Yes I'm wearing Jordans but I'm not a JumpMan
Last night without air conditioning. I can do this.
im jus saying if wade a 9/10 ..AI is a 8.5..dont forget how good the man was think back shit was amazing
I'll try not to miss u too much
thanks :D
The ineffable joy of forgiving and being forgiven forms an ecstasy that might well arouse the envy of the gods
Congrats to and all of the LOCs for enabling an awesome $83.5M economic impact on #Colorado! We can't wait for next year!
I agree, I love the song though xD
hopefully trent lockett will fill one of the scholarships. who do you think will take the second scholarship?
Manny's first AB results in first 6-4-3 of the spring.
thank you!! Thanks, also, for braving the nasty rainy weather to support us!
you are our artist spotlight of the day on SoundGarage Mobile. Thanks for the amazing sounds!
Let's work on rearranging these, please. #pointless RT : Deck chairs on the Titanic.
your night looks like an 8th grader that's been left alone for a few hours. I'm jealous.
Whenever I fill out an application, in the part that says "If an emergency, please notify:" I put "DOCTOR". What's my mother going to do?
hmm, it does bring up the interesting challenge of getting manually sent articles to customers automatically. (So far, magic!)
Anyone have a good book recommendation?
I went to Woostock 94 on crutches.
Tonight I am doing our taxes. Because, as my husband put it, "not going to federal prison is a noble cause."
well instead of a huge comeback it was a huge choke at the end. Everything really is bigger in Texas.
About to edit my first process video for a tee design I did.....Here we go!
yes. 4th gets us a gme of lone wolf. Any takers?
Time is running out for the April Teaching Carnival on Do you have something to include? Tweet asap. (Pls RT)
Costco run with
hit me when u get off bro
is cute af
Also feel less bad about it when on other games team sells tickets for under your price paid as a STH.
That was sweet of her. :) so soon. Goodness
need really easy2setup bulletin-board style online civic engagement tool for one-time government initiative. suggestions?
Google glasses for augmented reality experiences coming soon! says at
Thank you for sharing my dear Manfred!! :) <3
most definitely
done and done
everyone is copying with the kitten stuff!!
Oh damn, I don't ever want to be on that site, either!
should have followed back
Cutting the grass is one of my projects for tomorrow...if it's not still raining that is!
Turkey Bacon >>>>>
Dog ass niggas , miss me with this shit
Jodi, thanks for following. I am on twitter follow limit right now, so I'll follow you back as soon as I can, PEACE
Happy Weekend Ladies!
when is it???
that awkward moment when you keep nodding and saying yeah to your crush when theres nothing left to say
He just called himself fat..&he has a six pack..what
Word, son.
#Ucla it is Bazz
Just met with Elliot Abrams at tonight's AIPAC dinner in San Diego!
i will do shoutout for shoutout. but instead of shoutout this acct, can you shoutout ?
Y I NO WAT?
I agree. A lot of public company CEOs are overpaid. Let's focus on wealth, not income. That's where the real gap is.
Madison, Appleton, Chicago... But what about the beautiful and fat city of Milwaukee? We like movies. We like Doug
Yes! I love 's new cd!!!! Ahh its amazing.
Bet austins gunna be late for his reservation at og.
Can you help spread the word? We're compiling a memorial book: What were you doing Sept 11? Proceeds will go to charity.
Never mistake kindness for weakness
Looks like many central Texas freelancers woken by the storm are getting some work done at 3am. Good morning, friends!
done, follow me (=
Is this how you do it these days? Have I just been out of the game that long?
I like that idea ;)
Interested in doing an interview for my radio show?
My entire music collection has been upgraded to 256K AAC encoded and DRM free. Thank you iTunes Match.
drown'n in the upmost of dope shit... fuck'n with the deep end...
I'm looking for your best tips on how to become a successful blogger.
Molly is falling asleep to Bon Iver and my dad says he enjoys Bon Iver's music.
And every single time I look in to your eyes, I see a little bit more sunshine, I feel a little bit more like me <3
I could live w/ a Depp cameo, but no more starring roles for him in a Burton film!!
Peeps are getting lots of ❤ on our Facebook poll. Aged/cured is trending. What is it about stale #peeps?
lol youre a jerk. I was like ohh jeez. Oh well. I have my music preference. That line i quoted i made up anyway lol.
have fun and b careful =)
*WELLINGTON haha wow. I'm lame
I once spent a year in Philadelphia, I think it was on a Sunday. ~ W. C. Fields
Only Dead Fish Go With the Flow...Xx
Great time in NYC, saw 3 shows: "How to Succeed", "Anything Goes" and "Sister Act".
It's such a nice feeling to still get fan messages from people in Iran, I had no idea my shows made such an impact.
"It's a sign of your own worth if you are hated by the right people."
So, you didnt mean anything you said? Uhmm...then why'd you say it?
greatt right when i come back from break i have a science test and i havent even filled out the study guide and its hard
douche me!
Oprah is seriously knocking her final talk show season out of the park. As only Oprah can.
Leach is no longer "a coach"....he isn't coaching.
thank you kasey!
'BIG Thnx 2 and 4 multiple mentions!! ALSO and 4 mentions! You guys rock!' You're welcome!
I FOUND MY WALLET OMG. THANK YOU JESUS. <3333
They are used in preparing cakes, cookies and brownies, and can be used alternatively with sweet dark chocolate
I WANT PANDA EXPRESS. WHO'S WITHH ME?
when your professor's shirt comes unbuttoned and she is accidentally exposing a wide portion of her belly to the class...
Real time vital monitoring will change our healthcare Topol
thanks man! If you like that you'll like our new project for sure! Pre sales start tomorrow n you get a free download with it!! :)
You know I stay blunted SHIT so big she felt it in her stomach
We are new here...Thanks for the warm welcome! :)
you're 12. No one stalks you. Stop being shady!
what do you mean?? :/ hahaha
i don't really like the work "trending" if we're talking about something other than twitter
#10ThingsIFindAttractive Eyes of any color
": A little surprised UK has Miller taking the ball out. I'd think he's one you want to have shooting the FTs." Y he hasn't done mu
You can always count on me....to climb over a seat.
yup you got to put it in the Crock Pot and make a Pot Roast
I love the old fonts on those signs. The subway looks awesome. Post more photos! : )
Happy Halloween. We played a party on friday. It was great!!!
where is this? I'm exited for my birthday bingo at Sandia on Tuesday.
I haven't heard the response yet, I've just heard my Mother facepalmed
Personally my favorite #DrSeussBook is The Cat In the Hat but #TimTebows is #GreenEggsAndHam that story makes you #Hungry lol
RT : Downside to citizen activism via social media?Nomore open mic night at the city council meets. That's comedy gold!
yes, sir! Whatcha wanna do? :-)
Looking to connect with #bozeman biz leaders! Getting back to #MT today
if I can't call someone a dumbf**k on your Fb page then get blocked, why are you letting someone call Lohan a crack whore?
I can if they in different conferences!
I don't just want, I NEED Transformers tickets!!!! When will you be giving more away???
done c:
The snow is coming down in northern New Mexico!
great meeting with , now at a photo shoot with !
financially it's not in my budget but professionally I have to. Work is at a standstill today.
It s a long break.
Fire that lawn mower up!
Did you know people are getting paid to mention products in their Facebook statuses? That's as crazy as the discounts at Dave's Furniture
- even w/out bounty program it will & always happen.
No no no no no
Bored A'F And Still With
Try our Ancho Chili sauce on your hamburger tonight! We promise you’ll love it!
I kno. He really needs to get a life and grow up. People have opinions. Get over it. It's really not this serious
That's what's up Obama... good move yo.
Sometimes I feel all alone in a crowed room... Gathering thoughts.
Thanks for accompanying me to #sdaff tonight. All those celebs, and your ink gets all the attention. You rock.
Sleep time! Starting my summer class in the morning 😚
like my joke about inventing beaches? Sometimes I'm funny...sometimes.
Sinatra & Basie At The Sands performs Oct 8th @ The Smoot Theatre in Parkersburg West Virginia. Show time @ 8pm.
he likely has a cold. Its a Hall's.
And the ovation! Fantastic. I can only imagine what will happen tonight for Stemme, Kampe, and Jovanovich!
Grt! RT : What have I accomplished for #WomensHealth thus far today? Mentoring, philanthropy and project development!
Knicks + Rangers + Yankees + RAW = couch potato Bindel
Still awake and drinking beers with
FALLEN ASLEEP...SMOOTH!!! Will add to my collection!!!
good morning
Working/traveling to NYC. We shall see how this goes on 3 hours of sleep.
So they take a guy who can't stay on the field in passing downs? RT : New #Packers DT Jerel Worthy is a perfect fit:...
I used some videos produced by another clinic and have limited rights to distribute the supported conv. tutorial
you too!
Never Been In Twitter Jail ( :
feel better! That bug has been going around.
I need another
Your mind has 450 words then filters and only speaks 150 of those words...your body language reveals what u are NOT saying
To my dear niece : I TOLD you about Austen. Took you long enough!
I wish Austin had a Spurs bar
You can do it!! I'm going in about 45 min RT : Definitely not going to make it to the gym today - bummer!
he tweets like Samuel L Jackson talks too loud really
Wait, not free, but still an RDA webinar. Sorry
TY for the RT. My mom just got more excited over that than my b-day!
Watching the Year of the QB - mmhm Luv Timmy time
what happened to the youtube account you made?
They are gorgeous!
That guy just got knifed!...thats forked up... Too spoon?
Thanks for the RT!
thats an interesting name how old are you?
This whole Jeremy Lin story is overrated...if ESPN wants a REAL come out of nowhere story I've got a lead for them -- Seth. Sinovic.
Worried bout yo followers u betta get yo dollars up
My field laptop smells like its been sitting in a barn for weeks.
thanks for following back!! Let's chat about the bags. Love your site!!
Hoping this #Gophers season is a new beginning and not a one and done
I'm at my second hockey game ever. It's really too bad San Diego doesn't have a team.
What is your favourite thing to do when you're sad, that will cheer you up.
AiNT NUN ON TV..iM FiNNA TRY TO GO TO SLEEP...
You're both coconuts. And I love you. And you're crazy. And I love you some more.
crying kids irritates me
Trail run, making salsa, bbq, a little vino...que bueno!
it was great chatting with you too. Looking fwd to more interactions :-)
“Fiction is a lie, and good fiction is the truth inside the lie.” ~ Stephen King
sweet band at la grange in deep ellum if you are looking for something
E! Good luck!!
well played RT : "Thats what she said!" RT may the fourth be with you, get your lightsaber out?;)
Stop the presses: Aaron's teeing it up in the Pro-Am golf tournament at Pebble Beach -- I'll be glued to the Golf Channel through Saturday!
My character's name in Skyrim is Me So Horny....For Justice!
Senate to vote on 3 nominees today. But Senate has more work to do to end judicial vacancy crisis.
Some people are so fucking annoying, shit the hell up!
gotta turn it on...gotta be #boobiemiles wit it
If they had called it "Repeal 4th Amendment Act", people might not have voted for it
I try to find the beauty in all work but sometimes it's tough when the bathroom has to be cleaned :-)
follow me soulja, U THE BEST ALIVE no doubt. we love you
Hey girlie girl, congrats on your new job, that's so exciting!
I'll make sure to do that, since you're also known as the boss and all. ;)
Clearly I need to start making office calls... (RT ladies at work discussed today how cute the garageband instructor is.)
omg i step is so boring....
Welcome to the Rams!
Damn Austin! You don't know what you missed
send me your address and I'd be happy to transcribe that seciont it for you.
remember to set your clocks forward tonight. it's spring forward time.
the Spirit in which we accomplish something is what truly defines the Journey <3 Make today beautiful for yourself & those around you~
Yeah I agree nowaday you have to give your 1&2 reps bec with injuries and the way we play in the SEC you never know!
Heading to San Diego. Early morning flights are the worst
#False. Collect your seeds and do not support seed manufactures unless they are non #GM and
BOUT TO CHANGE MY NAME
I never got it
today was my last final exam for the semester :-)
That's what I hoped, and can't disagree. Great book, though, and continue to love your bubbly recs. :) Cheers.
When will twitter let me type more than 140 characters
Jen Vernon showed Women of Troy, an awesome docu-poem illustrated with stunning photos.
I honestly dont know why i love em iconic boyz so much!~<3
if we did people might start realizing that "contributors" expect a return on their money
OMG! Haven't tweeted you in FOREVER. Whats up? You excited for #BTWB in Sydney?
Never watched Dancing With the Stars before, but Jaleel White might get me to start...
It's gabby's graduation! Congratulations
you not here with me
bring me a plate!!!
Christmas Eve, guess I should put illustration work aside and enjoy the holiday. Workaholics have a hard time separating "work" and "enjoy."
Never thought they were better without Melo. Amare plays no def, clutters & stalls offense
God is Good!
Is that a joke?? Its has to be, right!
I feel like Twitter has been a little quiet lately.... hm.
since we like the same TV shows: have you watched Scandal?? Amazing.
“: Oh, so you say the dress makes you look fat? Silly girl, the fat makes you look fat.”
Thanks for the feedback - glad you like the stand & the show - we love the special performance by du Soleil too
call me when u have the chance
It's the dream of the 1890s!
this huge ass beetle was hanging on to my sweat pants i was like GET THE HELL OFF MEE. and my dad was like "no fear factor for u'
I just can't get over how grouchy Gload looks 24/7.
Dropped off my 7th grader in a room full of 11th graders to take the #ACT. He's understandably nervous but well-prepared. Go Ryan!
Don't wait to get to work until you see the evidence of God's blessings. God gives you the faith to get started.
I know me and Kari were like, but he was never in Florida... But someone told us so we googled it and we didn't find anything..
I saw you today.
Come on , put on a sale. I want to go home for Memorial Day!
if you follow me my life would be complete!!!
Got my order of Tall tees from They fit so well I almost cried. Not just longer--they are proportioned. Shoulders, waist, length.
no clue if I can my mom wont do anything about it.
praying we can make 30 more followers today!! =D
Worked on the Sauza Tequila Commercial today... I LOVE acting!! Sometimes, the work is just fun!!
SHOW TONIGHT!!!! BE THERE!!!!
I've got some issues that nobody can see and all of these emotions are pouring out of me...
Dust caked on sweating bodies.
I don't understand why people get so angry when a dog barks...? Like, aren't they supposed to do that? M
Catching up on Revenge
@ work. Soaking up the rays in sunny California.
3,400 + new students at Sharyland High School. No wonder my son had 15 schedule changes.
#cultofmacrules great contests now
ebay ;O Most popular "balding" auctions
great hit hamilton
Well, at least tonight's 2 bad games had 2 good endings & some decent-ish basketball from old or young guys.
btw, ur suggestions helped. Had comp drying, took it in for repair. $200 later, working again! Sticky keyboard. Suggestions? Thx!
Thanks for the nonprofit of the day shout out!
109 more days until #Bonnaroo2012 I cannot even begin to describe my excitement :) :) :)
In your opinion, who are the biggest corporate producers of educational media, right now?
Think Local - Act Local
hey louisville .. I am coming for ya!
Preparing for open sourcing a few apps on the 14th @ www.androiddevla.com and www.iphonedevla.com respectively. (via )
2 thumbs up if you think the Bears are making the play-offs.
There are a lot of smart people at #WhatsNextDC if any of you are looking for a job, please come find me in the continental ballroom!
you're .. Fail type
I hate that u play at Belly Up. They have dissed #LGBT community which u care about by supporting vehemently anti-#gay acts
Angie is quite a talent!!! xo
Drank about a gallon of water for my pre-employment drug screen and now they're making me wait.
Glad you enjoyed!
If you plan on purchasing all the PANTERA tracks, we are putting up a coupon for that later today. I would wait.
There is NO such beast. Believe me.
For every act of evil a person does i believe there is also a person who is willing to go above and beyond to do good.
Happy Halloween
That was back when he cooked all the time... my obsessive dieting in 2001-2006 cured him of that. :( He says he had a cooking "addiction."
#AskMeDoICare what people say, I'll say no
Nice life. El Presidente ... that's their beer ... and it's delicious!
Kobe Bryant is going to put Steve Blake in a bodybag
Lock of the playoffs bro...Celts tonight!
well it's too late now!
I cant right now Cuz im on follow Limit, but Ill try when I can.(:
Will there be copies of Bloom on vinyl for sale at The Orange Peel tonight?!
ty for the follow! Love your new song!
-> RT : Stephen A. Is now saying the Heat would consider trading Wade and/or Bosh for Dwight Howard if they lose to the Pacers
The Talmud~ A person will be called to account on Judgement Day for every permissible thing he might have enjoyed but did not.
o sweet old Frenchmen! Lovat place.
aww thank u. im very blessed(:<3
I feel like taking a history field trip today, but I'm feeling kind of uninspired.
good question! Maybe this wkd?!?!
So why is it OK to bring up what Obama did as a young boy but not OK to bring up the violent bullying Mitt spearheaded in high school?
oh yeah, that's a god show! (I like it too)
Like us on Facebook!
Los Alamos fire chief: Conchas 92,7000 acres; spreading 'aggressively' northward and onto Santa Clara Pueblo lands
IMO Bogut's top 4 center and we didnt get enough value for him. Plus, once you have a center you hold on for dear life. - now what-sanders?
Why did you copy her tweet?
John you always take it to the next level lol
It's may and I haven't been wake boarding yet. I wanna cry...
I really love Boston....
Very cool, thank you! I hope you enjoy it.
Good things come to people who work their asses off and never give up.
If you start using God for your agenda, He may stop using you for His.
Good afternoon
Cory Baker(Drums) and Alvin White(guitar) last night ripped it.Talked to Dana Hawkins @ the gig.Dude is a music encyclopedia.
Elizabeth Warren really likes pie. Her secret? Lemon juice.
Any1 in the world of fb...check out the Art Stormm Show!¡!
Game face on, bus to Dallas Conv Center, so it begins
- Burt's Bees has a poison ivy soap that works-
Happy bikini friday! Enter to win a cowgirls espresso ://ow.ly/1MohaG
Hi! Do you ever send a rep to an office w/ a pro subscription to give a tutorial? Would be much appreciated. Let me know. :o)
We will be displaying some new material soon that we have just finalized, but first we still need your help spreading the word about SL!!
I might -- nah, was thinking about 4square. No. Not yet another thing.
thanks for following!!! (:
Fuck you too bitch call the cops, imma kill you and those loud ass motha fuckin' barkin' dogs.
How are you guys doing on need for Christmas hams? Last we heard many more were needed; still the case?
asks all the right questions
HEY HEY HEY HEY HEY HEY I`m being so annoying / /
Loving my #klout topics at the moment. New to the list? Typos! I hope they mean that I hate them.
loners and hoes seeking for attention
Small world ! Thanks for the follow. Let's keep in touch.
Really cool stuff. Keep them coming. :)
Had a great spring break. Now I'm ready to get back to work.
Dang!!! What a day in apc!!! A great workout if ya ask me;)
Congrats to lucky follower number 1,000 - ! Prize is a free Offer to - 4 tix & a bottle of bubbly! :)
This week all Robbie wanted to watch was Star Wars so we watched IV and V. Today all he wants to watch is Care Bears. Bo!
Roofies... getting the Jersey Shore pregnant one girl at a time!
March already came and went in case you didn't remember. 2012 National Champs.
I'm at the farm and have all my things unpacked. Figuring out what to do now. Don't have orientation until 11:30am tomorrow.
same. Let's go and drink and be merry.
Should i put on my tin foil hat? RT Lots of radiowaves! RT I count 16 satellite/microwve trucks 4 Knox Arrival
thanks for watching! So happy to hear that the videos help.
uqh! in skool! uqh but happy im in computer class so i can qet on my twitter!!
Good morning to all you beautiful mothers out there! Nothing but sunshine in our way today, 68° inland, 58° lakeside. Enjoy!
Yea man. Hopefully it's hot
Back to the studio for the first time this year!!!
What? :p
tweet! It was fun seeing you guys! Let me know when ur in town again ;)
Only in Philadelphia does the Flyers flag sit on the flagpole as high as Old Glory.
I don't know what I look forward to more. Sundress season or Christmas?
Baby I hear melodies when your heart beats Baby it sings to me like Fa la la, fa la la
If you can't get someone out of your head, maybe they are supposed to be there.
A man who dares to waste one hour of time has not discovered the value of life
yes<3 If you look back things have changed so much compared to now. It's so hard for me to keep up.
Seen the video of LeBron James' mother allegedly losing it on a hotel valet. Story coming up on 7News at 5:30.
thanks for the invite mr. morcelle its great to c the clubs still goin strong, id love to come but i dont hav a way to get to SF
Federal Gov employee his whole life rails against benefits while receiving unconstitutional dual benefits
Our guest speaker is June Vining from Traumatic Interventions Program about what to say to someone who is facing a traumatic event
She is so cute
RIP Vaclav Havel, bright bright light.
Always a disappointment.
whatever, you communist.
Ronaldo is sexy ;)
how are your workouts going? i hear we have the same coach! i'm only in month 1 but loving it so far.
No sleep 😱
The weather is going to be perfect for tomorrow's MOVIE NIGHT! Join us on our patio for a special showing of The Princess Bride at 7:30pm!
FOCUS: ON FILM: THE AVENGERS WAS REAL GOOD & DIDN'T HAVE HARDLY ANY MUSHY STUFF WITH GIRLS ALSO HULK SMASH
"Grandma, just because that woman is wearing #yoga clothes does NOT mean we know her..."
drunk ppl run stop signs high ppl wait for them to turn green
you can get me at jtaormino (at) berklee (dot) edu
Excited that Season 3 of my Smithsonian 'Metro Mambo' Latin-jazz lec/dem series (launching 3/24) moves to Mus. of African Art in May.
Shawty Go Head
Blue Magic just came available for the night of Saturday February 6th! Contact us for details on how to book! 447.2446 www.okcpartybus.com
sometimes i see the world for how fucked up it really is, I tell myself I'll be the one to make a change in it.
"i just like feeling loved."
I am mad at every sf radio station that took turns playing the crappy train song that's stuck in my head now
yeah im back in action
The rain storm seems to be not quite as dramatic as forecasters warned. Sunny and windy with rushing clouds.
All SNOCLOTHING™ T-Shirts Purchased Through www.SNOCLOTHING.com Come with a free SNOCLOTHING™ Wristband!!!
can run all while tweeting more than Sounds like someone needs to step-up his twitter game!
On my way to Cianjur.. *blessed
long time Sis, wat is up with you, how are you???
I was just trying to use Sherry's white laptop. What's a good alternative for OSX?
Watching Penguins/Flyers. Love playoff hockey!!
You can only hide shit for so long
a nice ass
Jim died what no :(((
forgot that I own a tv. it's used more for decoration than watching :)
,its a rainy gloomy Indiana day,I'm thinking mindfreak marathon!!
download eAudiobooks free via Atlanta Public Library or DeKalb Public Library systems
Yes! #Giants win! I have no fingernails left, but it was worth it.
It's been a day of reading about necronyms in old Hingham and Concord. Now, to go dream about 'em.
no kidding MT Gingrich: "We are looking at the abyss"
RT : IM game tonight.. Gonna put up at least 12.. And by 12 I mean 12 turnovers
Advantage Micro Computers Repair Security & Networking Tucson’s Computer Repair and Service Specialist for Over 39 Years 520-290-0595 We
I got preverted when i knew wass! ;p
Today we're at Fedex Trade Networks International Transport & Brokerage 2349 Aviation Drive Indianapolis.11-1:30
just caught Kendra Hollywood story on E!, touched my heart! You really r a true gentle and fabulously handsome man!!!!
SERU 2.0: eILL: there is no consensus on e-book ILL. May need an FAQ re: issues you might want to discuss in arranging ILL in a license.
Thanks. Channeling it into making sure we defeat the amendment here!
Hey AUPeeps! Click on the Monkey on our FB page to sign up for our e-news!!
"Jealous of the Angels." :) The Title Track is "Change."
hey guys please follow my other account since i have hit the follow limit
Thanks so much for RT!
Sitting next to a Zimbabwean woman who isn't interested in small talk with the Brazilian guy next to her. Next leg to Beijing
Muses is one week from today! So excited to ride!!!!
"I don't really know what I'm doing with my life, but I'm okay just doing everything." ..I feel ya Carlen. Same thing here.
I gotta become an early riser
Nothing much now.. Just trying to calm my mom down Wbu?
yeah that's a tough itinerary. I'm glad you could make the trek.
Had a fun night @ Lucille's.. lost of new friends and fans!
no problemo! its sounds super yummy... RT : Thanks 4 RTing Coffee house article. Hope you are able to get on their schedule!
I keep losing followers I had 58 and now back down to 48:/. Guys if u gna follow me follow me but don't unfollow me an hour
Make it crispy
starting now.. Let's do this
M gravy
Congrats on your weather victory...
= The New Tumbler Version of .... ugh, my ears!!...please, go away!!!!!!! Lost mad respect for
My nephew just ran out trying to scare me and locked himself out the house lmao
thanks fool T>T>
Do or do not, there is no try. Yoda, Empire Strikes Back
You know you are a Social Media Expert when you have to figure how to use the #newfacebook for work.
lml i be going in ; guys these days -.- glad my tweets can relate to you ^.^
hey I just met you
At least I didn't leave my headlights on in the car! RT : So happy I got to see since she showed up late ;P
RT : Think i am officially burned out on facebook.
I don't know. The grades were supposed to be up on Friday but...they weren't -___-
no... Maybe it's a sign. Your phone is fine. :p and done w/ what?
It's always nice to have someone in your life who can make you smile even when they're not around. ♥
Infinitis (I don't care what model) are not cool no matter what age you are. Seriously. Their TV ads alone should tell you that.
All in the session will complete an Audit on their own #Learning Transfer practices; we will discuss & share results
I do too. Of course, I'm a nerd that is fascinated by job titles and some of the strange surnames of film crews.
In honor of the Lunar New Year, join us tonight at StreetFood Asia at 6pm for the Lion Dance by Quang Minh Buddist Temple
DK Publishing Donates $95,000 in Books on Behalf of 501st Legion and Rebel Legion
is super cute
Going to be a bit toasty in the aircraft this afternoon
Would you have started Kadar if you were Pardew though ?
That's an awesome quote!
Omg lol RT I legit just threw up on my floor when I saw Allison Wonderlandd's profile pic in recommended friends on Facebook.
It really makes me mad how difficult it is to control monitors on a Mac. I want to play games on my 2nd monitor only. How hard should it be?
hey clarence! I've been good. Miss yall
Plato's 21st Century Metaphysics: Updated for Today's Business and Technology
CM Morrison moves approval of creation of solar committee. Mayor concerned about the fact that CMs don't all have direct appointments
"If we have to train people on using our intranet, we've failed." Needs to be intuitive.
So, my landlord can cash my checks but ignore my emails/text messages/phone calls? Bitch.
Many delays at DIA. Southwest Airlines has suspended all flights through 4pm.
Intelligence without ambition is a bird without wings
come in to BDW today! and get a green chile cheese dog combo for $5.99. Just say you saw it on FB...
I Need To Go Now See You Later :/
the awkward moment when you miss your ex-boyfriend and you fix him.
better check Austin and Rusty... they probably snatched it as the refs entered at 1B!
That may be the most embarrasing 63-27 win, ever
Everybody’s at war with different things…I’m at war with my own heart sometimes
My daddy is bringing me home sonic in about an hour! :DD
Halftime has mercifully arrived for Illinois: Wisconsin leads 31-18. That's a season low in any half for
I HATE TWITTER SO MUCHTHIS IS MY SECOND TWITTER BECAUSE MY OTHER ONE DIDNT ALLOW ME TO FOLLOW OTER PPL, & OTHER IS ACCOUNT IS DOING IT?! FML
Albie is SEXY
RT : The healthiest response to life is joy ~ Deepak Chopra
lateral files, classroom tables and chairs, dry erase boards and more...almost anything you would need for an office or classroom!!!!
I love that I have the option to "blacklist" someone in my text message application
haha that guy is a joke...
I rep only myself and love ones till the day I die. No hood, gang or city.....
bravo! Clever,scary, mindbending, and funny. Amazing!
People..it's a great reward to a job you love, because then it's not work at all...
So anything amazing happen since I left? lol via
Cartoon Network's 'Level Up: The Movie' now available on DVD - Plain Dealer (blog)
Statute of Aaron at Miller Park. Also Hank Aaron Trail. Henry Aaron is a Milwaukee sports icon in Atl. uniform?
Stick to country Music please. Lol.
unapproved on the forum at this time until I get some kind of formal go-ahead.
I want a henna tattoo from you! a cute little heart, <3
Can u please follow
Sachal Vasandani tomw night at the Jazz Gallery wth his commissioned piece called "Shoot the Messenger", tribute to a Russian journalist.
Can u feel me reading ur tweets? It's like a touch from god but not really.
MTV studied us "Millennials". We take smart cuts, not short cuts. We play fair, or you are fair game.
- welcome back big homie. - Rome
Wowza...allergies going nuts. Never good when it burns to breathe!
For #emdm tomorrow - is African business source gaining traction? seems like a good idea with daunting challenges.
Already misplaced my SGA name badge. For all the rotten luck...
Having some fun !
Some are BNSF, not sure about Union Pacific. Next time I'll check.
Innerneh can resurrect Arrested Development - can it get us the French Paraboot brand shoes in the states?
The tag team match between MVP & Matt Hardy against Finlay & Mysterio was a damn good match. Just thought I'd throw that out there.
I believe Ravens are a close 2nd in the rankings. Good "call." :-)
It was great! RT : Thank you , , , , for an amazing night!
Oh local commercials you so silly
We are going to be releasing 2 songs off our forthcoming album this summer before our US tour,
thanks, I can learn stuff from this :). Appreciate it.
Has anyone else ever notice how messy Justin Alamia's bathroom is. Lol
looks good! Does he keep it on? Ours spends 20 minutes trying to rip off his "Holiday Outfit"
Idc! I need pizza!!! Hahaha :P
You're not the only one.
sorry. Meant to say let's firm up plans on Sat or Sun. isn't Sunday the day you give bikini carwashes?
Finally going home after a great trip to D.C. and NYC. Posts to follow!
Sorry haven't posted my story yet, gonna do it in a bit :)
Someone having a bad day... a vehicle in the pond across from the snake river inlet off Swan Mt rd. Only a ski rack is visible...
new music dropping today tweet #burghorlandoami and help us trend!
I hope that local guy in findlay gets that smug CEO's job.
haha yes it actually is :)
I didn't think Phila would be Boston at home they got they win they needed ... They have to protect home court
#22 The Departed
Yep club me please omw to a photo shoot lookin chinese
Congratulations inductees, especially Charles Banks Wilson, recipient of our 2009 Oklahoma Humanities Award!
do you know how much is guaranteed?
btw - I really like the KEXP Kurt Vile set, I just wish that it had been broken into separate vids for the songs so I could rip them.
Feature: Smashing Pumpkins: &quot;I&#39;ll have the last laugh&quot;
We've got two new shows booked, Feb 12 & March 3, details at www.thescrams.com
No riding today, but did get to shovel the drive twice. Hopefully I get to do it again in the morning before work!
Oh no I'm drunk
The Papercutting of a Salesman
u play sim 3
Wait... I just re-read that last tweet. Apparently I'm 14.
Post Veterans Day trivia... who, from the Shenandoah Valley, earned the Medal of Honor?
Im boutta watch tv there isnt nothing else to do
Indeed, volunteer software -- I'd love to show it to you if you have a few minutes.
Linsanity continues! This dude is unreal..
arriving Monday afternoon. what's the plan?
I'm stending drunks to twitter
Congrats to for being our 100th Twitter follower! Find us Tweet us a hello.
awww thanks. I look tore up from the flo up in that pic haha
#preswk12 also harvesting digital video on YouTube. Not sure if accessible due to licensing and difficulty contacting content creators
powerful series Authority of a Believer - Sun. Pt3 The importance of ur words ~ Blessing & Cursing don't mix!
Studio flow .
BRB:D
I love She makes me happy. c:
Wish I had madden '12.
Today is a wonderful day to treat yourself to breakfast!
Mind goin' crazy, should I stay or keep goinnn'
| Our Downtown is coming alive! Let's support all of our Phoenix Suns!
Welcome! RT a few of my fellow service members & I r dining at your downtown Elways restaurant,right now. U should swing by
I need a fix. I need a Chilis.
Thx for all the birthday wishes. Great day. I'm undeservedly blessed. Thx to my lovely bride. Also, great lax win last nite Panther Select.
You ever play Undead Nightmare x box 360 what about MW3 call of duty?
I feel that the #republicans are in the dark kind of like when you email someone and they call you back instead of emailing. WTF?
Man: We've seen dysfunctional board after dysfunctional board. Gone through superintendents like crazy. We're tired.
Thanks for the retweet sweetie :)
I was never a 2chainz fan. But lately that boy be going I'n. He killed that mercy. -give credit when it's due...
The album comes out TOMORROW!
Nice. Looking forward to seeing your new direction.
Thanks god for letting me get up this morning
At the game. Its now sunny
Somebody take me to the Elsik after parties! 😁
A big thank you to all that took part in the filming of the TV spot. We'll let you know when it is up, so you can see it.
": The worst part about being lied too, is feeling stupid u believed it"
free = yeah doe!
"Sell your soul to the devil" - WTF!!!!! :o
Money talks, and unfortunately mine only can say "goodbye!"
uh no u stay away from Alex :) I lov my car too!
Sitting in lunch having chex mix and a water..
Goodnight Andrew!(: <3 Have a good sleep.. ^__^
of course s'mores would be awesome right now; at what point in life have you ever thought, "s'mores? nah, that'd be terrible."
Up bright and early. All emails returned.
Too bad your not you lol
oh no glee didn't, yes they did , did Chicago..
I like the fact that you guys are busy reporting.what the game is about
Dealing with DNS feels like working in slow motion. "Wait 24 hours for this propagation", "Wait 15 minutes for Linode DNS to refresh". Grr
Dawn used to be cool. Now she is a whiny hoe. GET OVER YOURSELF.
#this RT : William Levy ... You are beautiful not only on the outside but inside as well wow
Are you a Maintenance Technician or know someone who is in Indy? I've got a job for you. DM or email
Exhausted after three day laser meeting. At least it was in San Diego. Thrilled that was able to attend!!
Ma girl just got her Twitter page rock she need sum #followers >>>>>>>> #ff #teamfollowback show her how we roll
One of our girls is in the Military! Doesn't get much hotter than that!!
i wish i had the money to go to 's nyc show in june :(
Watch them make Chicago look better than it is.
Thanks for sharing. They were beautiful.
killed it last night...thanks for the grey goose shots
yea me to doc got me on a diet
New on the tweeter thing , what's to it
LOL, dude that's cool. ": my mom thinks that if she leaves food at my desk randomly that I'll just eat it. What am I, a stray cat?"
you are the best! thx! Although now that we are friends...we've got a fridge to move, do you have a truck?
I am so sorry guyzzzz i havent been on twitter 4 a long time :(
USA Network talking social with One of the best networks in the social space today.
I don't know whether to laugh or cry...maybe both are in order.
#TNWIC women celebrate computing in beautiful Tenneessee
my ole buddy John Edwards goes on trial today. Seems like just yesterday we were laughin' it up at Jim Black fundraisers
I listened to all your lies and sweet talking. I trusted you. I gave you my all and you let me down. I hope you're happy.
We have a splendid selection of edibles. Minty-O's, Cheesecakes, Carmels and savory items too! Where are you at?
It's been a hectic week. So I bought my first HOT DAMN! I will not tell my husband about my thing for MacKinnons
No rule on that-I just think he's been more valuable and won more games
Bienvenue au Twitter!
funniest two words in the game industry "innovative shooter"
Hey, you sing VERY good, can you give me a follow back?
i remember screaming my head off in the 90's during Bills playoff games saying "Biscuuuuuuuuuuuuiiiiiit!" BEAST LB!
GREAT question. RT Timing question: How long exactly until New Girl simply becomes Girl?
Just asked my mother to make roasted brussel sprouts for xmas eve dinner. Her response? "you need a boyfriend."
You must be a Mizzou fan
New York State's Comptroller announces audit of Long Beach, NY, to begin soon. Focus will be on summer programs.
Season's Tweetings: “He sees you when you’re sleeping”? Yeah, nothing creepy about that.
BTW, the director Stanley Kubrick married that actress. I would've too.
how ya been?
Casting call for Midwest fashion week is on August 20th, from 4:30pm location into salsa dance studio...
wow. never thought about the lesser of two evils in quite the same way...
when will you be here?
made it home to sweet puppy kisses! How's your boy?
FUCK BITCHES GET MONEY!! FUCK BITCHES GET MONEY!!!!! FUCK BITCHES GET MONEY!!!!!!!!!!
you will. Believe in yourself and work hard and you will make it! I study business economy
Last time I checked I was single... Don't be calling me months later nigga talking about where u been...
If only were here!
Power out in neighborhood and i am working from home. This means no internet. Don'want to go to work...
Lehrer: But I am optimistic. We have a tsunami of information available. That's a great thing.
PASSED. Get ready Basic!!!! Woohoo
Lmao(x ": I'm at the mall and I'm looking for something that says, "Hey I'm not a stripper, but I will put out.""
heading down to the #accordion fest. gonna be a great day!
hello, okay followed :)
... Phillip Phillips!!! 👌👍 you joined the AI train just in time for the good part :)
S/o f4f
has five of the top ten singles on iTunes. What??
Says the guys who think EoS contains his best material.
#FREEDEMRADIOPARTY Lets go!
Yeah I'm clapping along at home with john adams beatin his drum at the #Indians game
Few things can kill a soul faster than meaningless business speak. Now if you'll excuse me, I have to go facilitate these deliverables.
Stomach hurting shawty. Its gotta be from a cum deficiency!
Rick Santorum speaks about his passion, poor black children. Oozing sincerity.
let's go! Haha
Thanks For that WISE U tube Very GOOD Bob
I ordered the fuel band medium - its been few hours and still no confirmation email. What gives?
by those same college grads who could not afford health care now can!
OAuth clearer, looking forward to #devexp improvements to come.
no I'm not
What I admire about someone is not what they do, but who they are, and how they are being in the world. That is the impact we can all have.
I don't think I ever rest....
RT": Restructure contacts get Osi!! Is this viable or am I reaching???"they play diff. positions and he costs way too much.
Here we go again..
i promise you'll love this band called poema!! ! they are awesome! :)
My favorite keys are black
You too!!
At home bored no ones home..need someone to chill wit
Let us know how it goes!
Also, the Pixies.
Really don't like this limitation that twitter has once you reach 2000 followers. You have to get more followers yourself, to follow others.
Thx to all the happy folks who came to the #SBVillage and wonderful volunteers who staffed more than 100 hours!
Oh look, 100 followers...let's throw a party...and did I mention the UWM Post interviewed me yesterday?
Missing the beautiful beaches of San Sebastian.
I'm very sorry to hear about your dad. Hang in there. You have my thoughts...
I've been reading your updates... just not commenting... I'm changing the way I use twitter!!!
I'm so ugly, I freakin' hate it.
Today I completed a flowchart and tracked down an executive order on the distribution of HIV treatment in Africa by former Prez Clinton.
Got me nap in... Now it's time for some Grand Prix racing from China...
Top Gun?
my condolences bro
Sourwood honey is better than the wildflower honey. It's killing me how delicious this is.
I need weed. And I need this day to be over. The vibe of today is complete and utter SHIT! So fuck this. And fuck Wednesdays.
I was thinking he same thing! For me, and now that you bring it up, you too.
Thanks! I'm curious which ones you voted for.
Even 3-0 is too early to celebrate with this team. Groan. Shoulda heard the volume in BAC when Cats scored tying goal. Wow.
o you knw what sounds good right now chocolate lol anything chocolate #ThatsWhatIWant right now
ok MS Word, it's time for me to figure out the gritty details of how your page numbering works.
twitter gm's errrrrywhere
Listening to all damn day. Headphones on blast
I have an awesome "work permit" from Germany in my passport.
Feel free to let them know that companies like mine use that bridge almost daily servicing out customers!
Painting tonight
Damn man what the fuck
"If you can't be with the one you love, love the one you're with."
Levon Helm- God Bless So sad
Truly - to a one, everyone in that band has an impressive solo career. Fairly awe-inspiring.
Creeped out a little bit because I found a random twitter account that's only following me & Justin Bieber .__.
Blah blah blah
to get myself outta trouble fer springin news on 'im like that without a "if you please"
Noone has found the secret message on our Twitter page yet? You kidding me?
and an hour later, still no coupon...
Tweetin in the treetops all day long blah blah blah blah singing my song
Good luck to our junior crews traveling to Dallas this weekend for their first competition of the semester- S.W.E.A.T. (indoor rowing)
Huge congrats to all the Ovation winners!!
RT : Thanks for following me here! [Thanks for bringin us the City every day Francesca!]
Yeah it's a great piece and Shadid's death is such a loss to the world and Packer nation in particular. Glad you enjoyed it!
How fast can you add graphics to a car? Match 2.2 of the Wrap Cup Masters is underway!
I see that it's a special date & today we celebrate. Not for cat or rat or even a moose but today it's a birthday 4 a doctor named
Shopping Cart Manufacturers: did you know u need a new cart? #IHaveAnIdea ! It is useful and easy to use. It would be so much better. 3112
Although it IS my "beat" (I'm on drums and production), I'm not claiming it as my own. It's jus a remix. LOL!!
Don't worry about a thing cause every little thing is going to be alright (:
#BackInTheDayWhenIwasAKid is where I wanna be! Like Snoop & Wiz sang: Young, Wild & Free!
Talk to you in 90 minutes.
everyone experiences trauma in different ways. It is a derailment of the normal relationship between mind/body/food.
RT : #Cancer's have a sweet nature.
Rejection is direction!
Editing photos and trying out some new techniques
what's up
oh wait he ran off
oh. i thought you actually cared.
Keep you beneath the stars.. Won’t let you touch the sky.. ♥
When I grow up I want to live in Brooklyn.
"I will ask the owner-- Stop using this excuse "
Graduate to the next level with this week's Custom and Micro Beds! Check them out now on #productionvault!
We're wrapping up this six-month project, and we'd like to thank all our community members and partners for their participation.
She plays Barbies. Of course she does.
allright now let's look 4 it :D
Hahaha i love laughing with my mom :D
very jealous! :)
We're still offering the Bangers and Mash Omelette, Fried Oysters and Eggs plus Mulligatawny soup....
Welcome to May, otherwise know as Membership Drive month.
Mass was so long Omqqq
Ohh, and Christina, that, "...he's a real man who doesn't put down women.." really?! Just shut up!! What you did was ridiculous. Ugh!
Time to eat
hey bro! Tried to follow back but was forbidden! Lol!
Boy o boy
agreed, bad idea. I say a combo of Kohl and the Potawatomi Tribe build it (or maybe NML). thanks for the follow too
best tweet ever, this just made my weekend!! Wish I was there to recreate this one year anniversary
no wonder she looks puzzled
Fuzzed out mindz from fuzzed out kindZ
Other Area Division 3 teams at Deerfield Classic include: Princeton/Green Lake, Fall River & Madison Country Day, which is co-oping w/ ALC
Ah, Charleston...it's such a nice feeling to wake up in Charleston.
: I want it all
I'm tryna play the clock like dat
no but i want him too
keep on doing what you do to keep the music living and breathing. Appreciate you!
I have the bestest staff ever! Happy birthday to me :)
Don't forget the KPIG sticker, which is rarely seen next to the "W"
LAX'N with colldog soon
Another day another plane . . . Going from Detroit to Norfolk for a symposium
Tafur vs. Kawakami 5 5 minute rounds. They seem to be the most feisty.
Abuse of your #freewill is like getting high on your own supply.
my parties are 99.9% gay men because they are always down to rage!
You know someday you're going to design something amazing for me ;)
Love when he doesn't get the sarcasm or the joke and then ALL of the sudden he does. :) #slpeeps He does a great job.
Stop attacking kids, The children are our future!
oh, yeah. meant to ask if you'd converted your desk?
awesome! thx!! the reposts and curating of #cxcw will be the jam!!
Pretty sure Jordan is just making all this up as he goes along. This shit ain't planned.
My butt hurts
Adam Yauch RIP
Really mad at my twitter app right now, just discovered three tweets I thought I posted that were never sent.
It's raining Atlanta come Park at Indoor for Outdoor Pricing. Please stop by the outdoor booth attendant first to park Indoor for $6.99/day!
So done with this class. It's about that time.
NO! Well, maybe its not so bad. we can open a franchise taco cart, do better than them and buy them out :D
Go follow honestly he FOLLOWS back !! #TeamFollowBack ..
I don't like Mark. I haven't for a few seasons. I want Donald to go to finals. I think Derek and Maria will go though.
haha no not yet! I don't think she will be very happy!
Anytime Its Truee I Won't Okayy(:
I should probably go shower.
your most welcome tie stealer!
I hope TEC is ready for C and Z! Oh, and: that's a long way from a baptism in the Harding fountain...
Judge nothing, you will be happy. Forgive everything, you will be happier. Love everything, you will be happiest.~Sri Chinmoy
Thnx for the #FF's & Right back @ ya & I hope you all have a great weekend!
#NDSA Y. Stickler on why projects fail: never tell anyone, no history/proof of concept, unrealistic expectations, 2 much biz 2 li'l passion
in that case, you could do something silly to relieve the stress, like adding "with a moose" to the end of every sentence.
For example, combining health & environment sensors, can correlate asthmatic symptoms with air pollutant measures.
Procrastination = my worst enemy
Go to bed
yes it does :)
#Watching horror movies!
why the hell not?! 😡
my fantasy picks have been pretty good lately. had Kuchar, Singh, Simpson and Day at #Barclays. gets tougher w/ eliminations for FedEx Cup
i wish for that too.
What did u guys think of #Wrestlemania28 ?
Happy Birthday
My doc will also get the disks.
I just asked a guy for a light and he said with a big 'tude "nope! Sorry!I don't touch cancer causers" - I hope he gets cancer and dies.
therein lies the crux of my frustration w/everything!why will NO one, Dems included, call the GOP out on their obstructionism?
Playing 12-2 at the grand opening of Fox Auto Superstore in Nicholasville today. Stop by and check it out-BH
I'm glad you agree. :) cc
of course you can! ill give one right now!
yes indeed!
The most marketable to young boys... And the most beefy ones.
We're out of waffles. My morning is ruined.
Dear immune system: can you please start doing your job and get rid of this nasty feeling I have, before I get full blown sick! Thanks.
Eek, less than ten minutes till Vampire Diaries! I can't wait! Happy Thursday!
whoops, I sent PC tips. Can you check your Temporary Recordings folder under Home\Movies\Camtasia 2
New Prince CD came out yesterday sold only at Target. I went to his concert on saturday nokia theatre la live it was great.
skills pay the bills! Great fight
Caring my phone eveywhere I go.
any reason for this years cancellation?
think just friends. Browse around the website.
Just cause your my girlfriend dosent mean I have to agree with you..
watching videos, an hour later.. hmm i have homework...
Totally normal. The new normal, that is...
We will have to do again. Can't get enough of your fig pizza and awesome wine list. #delicious!
so long Vegas. thanks for taking all of my money.
It's like we have the same brain! My thoughts exactly!
Exciting work!
#YouKnowYoureBroke when you can recite your EBT card number by heart...all 19 digits
I wish a certain someone saw that
ok and then after that we can have a race and see who wins that.
is attending the 6th Annual Silk Road Conference on July 20th in Chicago.
Prosecution has made some points as well, but how well Hardin does tomorrow v. MacNamee is going to be make or break (cont)
Bowling later on..? I think so.(:
In addition to our Career Fair on Wed., we have our Monthly Mega Networking Event at Johnny's tomorrow evening!
you get over this step... and then there will be freedom. =]
How was your St. Patty's Day Weekend? Are you still recovering?
The only work tweet you'll ever read from me: On time, under budget, and unanimously approved.
I have the same vacuum.
Every week I'm blown away by what God is doing at To our team: You guys are incredible! Love doing life with you!
it's not like a movie, it's not all skin & bones!
so am I off your shit list? Lol
i love #FoodSleep&Music
great to be home after a long long trip don't forget the plastic duck.........
Come to the Grackle tonight for some good music and free beer... us, Ume, Life & Times, Magnet School. Art Vs. Science... So many bands
Tomorrow night will be our last show for about a month. Don"t miss it. Doors open at 7 and music starts at 8.
Same here. It's been a long week. -____-
NIALL I HAVE A QUESTION!! what does 'one four three' mean when its sung in a song?x :)
Add me ,, berry's 2265CC6F
Anyone else planning on distributing through ?
Hi sweet friend! How are you?
SOUPS ARE ON LIKE DONKEY KONG! We have New England Clam Chowder, Cauliflower Pepper Jack, Roasted Veggie Lentil, French Onion &Corn Chowder!
We told u about Alberta's eugenics; #Didyouknow it happened in the US too? NC committee recommends $50K for victims & educational exhibits
Mitt gets question about RomneyCare, slams a dead Ted Kennedy to get a rise, awk pause from audience. Fuck you Mitt Romney.
unfortunately it's not very optomistic
I hate to badmouth anyone I've never met personally, but I find it impossible to respect Lars Von Trier as a filmmaker or a person. -JO
oh okay good Lol, shit my phone dead :(
please do!!
im working but sonn i will retire using the opportunity here on peoplestring
No problem at all. This is Malcolm by the way :)
Back at home sweet home goodnight everybody !
Was curious to hear your thoughts about real-time operational intelligence. Speaking with some folks at Red Bull about this
“Freedom begins between the ears.” Edward Abbey
Certainly a legit point, but without vote from legislature or electorate, those in favor will just have to wait longer.
#InTheSummer niggas gone lose they mind seeing all these half naked females walkin around
open invite to our morning show!! anytime. right,
is teaching an advanced social media class! Wish you were here!
Lime putty mortar is more flexible than portland-cement based mortars - and not just for restoration anymore....
Deep Fried Twinkie's ya'll.
i want to go to bed, but pintrest won't let me.
You say its long-distance but I like to think of it as "geographically-challenged". ;)
7 minute commute home from work. AMAZING.
Even if not sued Brewster is setting norms for how copyright should work. When one can't change the law start with the norms.
This guy is DONE.... let the celebrations begin tonight!!!
Sorry for letting you down :(
it's getting hot in here. Go Wings!
RT : "LaBellaBooms Haha its cool im just mad u aint tell me ur husband followed me lol" <~ my fault. Oops. 😉 ;)
We are excited to check out your new spot! See you later! RT : Excited to show off our office today...
If you want you got it, You got that Va Va Voom.(:
OH: "The error is wrong."
- As an Arizona resident, imagine having to live with Brewer, McCain, Kyl and Pearce. Even the sky is red here...sigh
Good evening....love the new pic!!! How are you????
Tweet me ANYTHING and I'll pick 1 winner that will get a DM to Austin :)
RT : Are you in the Richmond area? If so you MUST stop in LeenaLu tomorrow for a Sassy Shoe Gallery surprise!!
DAMNIT COWBOYS, Can't y'all do ANYTHING right!!
Ok im off to the Ridgewood Country Club have a blessed say Tweople
Done with twitter...I'm tired. Nighty night friends.
just love who you are right now, the happier you are with yourself, and your situation the more people are attracted to you
High 5! RT : Thanks for the support &
Oh No! Paul Motian died today. An unbelievable jazz presence has left us. One of my favorites.
I hope this doesnt turn into a dr phil episode : Join #lrnchat tonight at 8:30 EST. tonights topic? METAPHORS
hi DAMN BOY u got insane abbs!!!!!!! Lol
talk to u later baby. i love you q
Sometimes the detours and interruptions turn out to be the point of the journey...slow down and listen today.
Manhattan is the last place you wanna b with your tank on E!
Leaving 2mro for tiny island off coast of Maine w/barely any cell reception...oh yes + a hurricane called Irene will be there too. Yay!
Moments away from a super awkward Saban Gatorade bath. 20 seconds of "bonding" with players then back to recruiting trail.
If you didn’t see it with your own eyes or hear it with your own ears, don’t invent it with your small mind & share it with your big mouth.
Classes that can't be time shifted are so 90's
As a Pastor, I fight for the right to practice one's faith without government interference. Let's restore the American Dream!
thank you love!
ap student: "i have an ap test and not math ap math and i need my ap calcutor and ap lunch ap everything."
People should not be rude to people who handle their food!
TGIF &THANK GOODNESS FOR THE SUN! Enjoy this beautiful day with a warm, juicy beef burger or one of our delectable veggie burgers! Opentil8!
Im pretty sure i used to see one on campus between classes all the time a couple of semesters ago!!! lol
RT #QuitActing like you don't want it (;
Twitter reenactment?
NEVER TOO COLD TO GET YER TITS OUT - signed, Everyone from The Generation After Ours
Casting call this Saturday for "Losing it With Jillian." See www.sdfilm.com for more info!
im lame haha
To build an on line community that loves the NFL Draft as much as I do. Additionally to educate Draft fans with my experience.
People should stop interviewing Ted Nugent he's obviously off his rocker.
Congrats to #Enes Kanter!!! What a year it could have been at #UK. Thanks for the UK love
FUTURE IS BETTER THAN LIL B ! Who Agrees & Who Disagrees Lol ? Anybody ??
Sammy Watkins Arrested: Clemson All-American Receiver Busted On Drug Charges
Have you seen the gallery display of glass orchids by the amazing artist Debora Moore? Only on view until April 8!
Hey chris can u do a shoutout to zayan from chain of lakes middle school
has a CALLBACK today for the supporting role of Mitsy Lyon: a fashion-obsessed, high-octane, kooky suburban mom - in Columbia Thesis film.
Plugging away at the new novel! Sit tight and you'll have it in your hands soon!
Every town needs a knitter, right?
woah make the ground move that's an
on Disney xd marvel master spiderman vs venom U need to check it out ...great job again!
#followWednesday Thanks so much for the #shoutout - very much appreciated! Have a SUPER day.
Caffeinated Quiz! First to answer question and win ! Ford Motor Company indicates that X% of every vehicle is recyclable.
We're a little busy at the moment :) It's on our list though /cc
Whitespace = draw own conclusions "A good presentation is a conversation. The audience needs a chance to play their role." via
Starting our first antihistamine free day as we await a new round of food allergy testing next week.
Back to business tommorow!
appreciate the insights was wondering if you wouldn't mind sharing some more thoughts can you email me
Good ass weekend ☺ back to reality tomorrow.
Follow the Constitution and make everyone pay taxes. Cut spending now. Not decrease in increase.
Don't hide behind parliamentary inquiry. The principal of independent judicial inquiry is established in law.
<3 that show
Please share info re personal workflows w/me!
Damn i miss the old Justin i know some of you are gonna wanna go off on me talking smack but i really miss the old him :(
Thanks Ed!
Hahaha! You typed! :D N me mad at you?? Nigga please..
#80Degree weather today,
Who was the first to see a cow and think "I wonder what will happen if I squeeze these dangly things and drink whatever comes out?"
Any specific new spas or boutiques? And events in March or April 2012?
#nowplaying Walt Dickerson, "I Love You".
30 is just scary. I certainly wouldn't want him as a dad.
#AGirlDeserves a guy that will keep all the promises her ex broke.
thanks for letting me know that. I love the feedback!!!
Your vote is noted :-)
Our shirts make awesome funny gifts for any young #armo you know. #imjustsayin Xmas sale, 25% off code: xmas25 expires january 6
I understand myself
I was just spaztastic just like you!!!! :P
Filling up the gulf 1 gallon at a time
Love it!! “: I want to bake a million things until there's no more sugar in all the world because I made frosting with it.”
i will follow back if you ask♥
your ad bar is shit. Quit fucking with my
that is the most awesome way i've ever heard anyone describe that!!! Yay!!
people are so overrated
#parkwayclassic done. Boom! I just finished a 10.2 mi run with a pace of 9'16"/mi with Nike+ GPS.
There are those who know how to treat God's people. Everyone is special in God's eyes. God is sick of elitism in His house.
GSA is the single best thing that has happened to FHS.
Don't blame the marketing department. The buck stops with the chief executive. John D. Rockefeller
i love takin a project bitch somewhere she aint neva been before (Gotti)
Walked today! Looking forward to tequila lime chicken quesadillas for dinner. Yum! Thanks for the awesome chicaken, Tischlers!!
Missing you already!
Wouldn't miss it! Your web-scraping sessions were a big hit last year, btw
Love you cousin! I'm proud at how far you're going (:
Who is ? In math: My solution. In history: My king. In chemistry: My reaction. In art: My heart. In me: My inspiration! ♥
your stalker (me) loves you! ;D
she can stay at my house.. I'll clean the dog cages just for her company. 😏
Hot Wheelz, the team from WE, wins the E-Dragster Race!
Congratulations to the new alumni who graduated in Puerto Rico yesterday!
Nice to see that crew on #Carlos show so much hombre to hombre love on the #goldenglobe stage...
HEY TYPOGRAPHY DOES TWITTER CONSULTS GOOD TIMES
I've had that happen, and also driven behind an idiot that yielded at every intersection; including 2-way stops on Esperanza +
“: Oh fuck the moment is near...the doctor is on its way to the room /(” #SwagLife Follow: &
I've been following you your whole Twitter life, I just updated my app and this new button wasn't labeled, so I pushed it.
Who me ? U wanna talk to me on whatsapp ?? Yeah sure LooooL😜😁
all hail restore-previous-session option!!!
I would have loved to of gone with but I didn't have the money
2 mile run #2, and no tobacco in sight. Good day.
In 1945 on this day the U.S. Congress recognized the Pledge of Allegiance.
you got that smile that only heaven can make i pary to God everyday to keep you forever<33 Follows?!
I also always thought we should aprouch friendship like when we where kids... Hi my name is Ettina, would you like to play?
So true! #Adoption is the only way to go =^..^= Purrs!
#HappyHour? Stop by til 8 PM for amazing app & drink specials at the bar.
Humanity can be quite cold to those whose eyes see the world differently. #art #quotes #fine art
is so handsome.
Somebody needs to step up and go whip this Kony guys ass!
I support DES Daughter Caitlin McCarthy’s nomination for a 2012 Presidential #CitizensMedal!
Don't kill yourself. We don't wanna loose another monster in the family. I wrote in your ask box on tumblr and now I'm..
most def! got u!
why is it so cold?
The best feeling in the world is seeing someone smile and knowing that you were the reason why :)
Whoa, right on, sir! Followed your fb link and did indeed appreciate the piece before I ever saw the personal recommendation!
Job hunting
Ooh! What all did you pick up?
#rocked the only way to respond to a girl who corrects you on her name
Sorry for my endless angry and unfunny tweets. I get mad when we lose. Apologizes.
Awe, that's sad. We had the same in my family reference apple pie. I think I'm the only one who's tried to recreate it. (Did well!)
R.I.P. "W.H.".....A GREAT VOICE AND A GREAT PERSON HAS LEFT US.
Another happy customer! Thanks to Jake from Wake the Wounded for the nice feedback!
I meant play in the same place, but together might be cool. Ha ha.
Ryan Finley RTs via J Scheer Devin7Fuller to take his 5th official visit to #ArizonaWildcats next week Smart men make great QBs
really amazing job on that picture of diggy, I really liked it! Extremely talented :)
where were you supposed to travel? i'm sorry iceland ruined vacation plans.
I Sware If Some One Make A Page Called #WeHate Page I Will Go Apeshit ,
no problem. Cheers!
I know why I don't drink beer makes me sleepy.
they gonna replay it i thinkk
that means we have 8 more registrant than Cuomo for his politics class.
night time swim at my housee?
RT 's whole damn family needs a reality show! I swear they do// lmaooooo bitch...im still DYIN!!!! DAT SHIT FUNNY AF!
wow it was so funny you had to laugh wit them
yeah i am missing out.
Ha! The joke is there somewhere for sure.
When is the new season starting?
Me too!
I need that again
I heard sirens go through town and I got all excited. Like awe shit who's getting busted!!?
Had an amazing time on set of Black Dog, Red Dog :-)
Am I supposed to be impressed? q:
Off to the keys :)
My kingdom for some rain! Southern NM continues to get it, but will the northern half have a chance? I'll let you know tonight on KOB 4!
I hope not, she is a super star in the making.
Cookie crisps!
. I wish. I'd love to guest for but, today, I was just watching. Lord knows I like a good feisty on-air segment.
our pleasure!
and you thought i wasn't going to follow you......
I'm practicing my Improv comedy routine.
Drinking krug wine while listening to my favorite chef go at it with jonathan gold about twitter Amazing.
#yuengling is the cure for sore throats and shitty work days
FOLLOW BACK:) AND TELL PPL CHECK MY MUSIC OUT:) NEXT BIG THING
Damn twitter wont let me follow bak certain ppl... ugh -.- im sorry yhu guys ill prolly try later.
"We know a lot of you are working 80, 90, 100 hours a week" #Yale #SOM MBA Admissions podcast
Hey man!
Thanks for the offer, I sent you an email
I for one certainly appreciate your work. Thanks for the quality reads and feel better soon my friend.
Happy Birthday to my little big bro
there are some nice looking candies but I am resisting!
Great to meet you yesterday. Just bought Twitter Power Thanks for recommending it!
That my crush
u can still use a computer to do it..
dam, after 11 shots, you shouldn't only be feelin' it, but seein' it too. :P
At the EHS open housee~ :P
Hand me my thinking grenades.
"got dressed through the mess and put a smile on my face" :)
Goodnight Philly! Hope to see you all at the booth on Wednesday!
Can't DM - need to get in touch concerning account security. Mind following or DMing us and helping us out? Thanks!
i think is dead !! RIP lmao
After the first, and tied at 0-0.
They say the cure for soreness is more exercise I come out more and more sore each time 😰
Lil kids been waving at me alot lately . .
Wojcik was a good guy, but the fact that he stuck around so long with his average record attests to how far TU's program has fallen.
Thanks for the shout out! #reachfortop was a lot of fun! See you at the next one!
GUESS WHAT I GOT!!
I don't feel like taking her, her stuff
Wonder what your dog is doing while you’re away? At #AtlantaDogSpa, you can check in on him with our #doggie webcams!
this season is out of control.
Too much negativity around me....gotta go!
Dope morning at freedom... Thankful for the fullness that following Jesus n getting with his people brings!
u need u a white boy lol
She just wanna ride with a G....
RT : Study time
people are fuckin ridiculous
video focusing tip from master control gentleman : zoom in tight, focus, then pull back out. Yeah!! Onto new heights!
"Night ben love you"..."go away"
im right here.
Sneaky bitches <
a travesty. What is the world coming to... *sigh*
ill POINT you in the direction of RICHMOND from my house !!
Nice personalized heat maps by calculated at different scales for different values. Could be a nice case for GeoTrellis.
Lot of tears behind my smile
Had a teacher I trained share her journey of the tornado via iMovie. Almost too much! We're all blessed to be here!
will do. I will push harder if I have to report back. I don't want to embarrass myself LOL
looks like a vinyl toy battle to the death.
Tweet tweet.
Not Vienna, Ravenna. It's 5:00 in the morning here.
You're Talented & Gorgeous, but your appreciation for your fans makes you a Superstar. Thanks! Merry Christmas!
tell him to sit down lol“: Chase n this extra big ass truck racing lol its too early”
RT Thumbs up to this! : "What is important is not what happens 2 us, but how we respond 2 what happens 2 us." - Jean-Paul Sartre
Cosmic bowling with this group is f'n hilarious!!! :-)
Anyone experience readers finding strange errors in their book on #Amazon #Kindle even though paperback is fine?
Love aint love anymore
I fucking hate my social worker
Please follow back :)
Lovin it ... button to boot in 15 sec
I'm a big fan of the idea that the NFL likes having LA open to use as leverage. Don't know it's true, but it'd be evilly genius.
...dedicated to serving the communities we live in. Then I go into my specific corps details...
Great day off with friends and family. Ready to take on another week then a couple of days off with Angie!
i will(:
learn ur own phrases and stop using nickis PLEASE! Did you need me to find you a boyfriend or something to devote your time to?
The Red Stripe was always cold and refreshing, pretty light on flavor and alcohol content, but I didn't have a bad one!!
...as I will work on getting to your classes! I'll come to LA..but...ever teach in San Diego? Maybe we can arrange it...
It is beyond offensive-- it's actually hurting people and they don't know it. Wish people would stop. It's unnecessary.
That's right.
Nothing better than falling asleep to the sound of the ocean waves <3
What's a song about Arizona?? I need one for a powerpoint at school!!
yes you should!:)
Good stuff!
At the track meet . Chrissy is doin' god ! #TeamCRICKET !
I loved it that he is having Holder go after the thieves of Wall Street. About time!
Today's a good Skateboarding Afternoon.
Hopefully it lived up to the hype. Beers always help too! Great to see you Shell!
Great living starts with a picture held in the imagination, of what you would like to do or be.
I wonder what the preseason odds were for the pacers to win it all
Off to Orlando, FL today preparing for the Early Stage Florida Venture Forum tomorrow. Big day for PicksLeague!!!
hahaha saw at barnes & noble while on my date and boy was it awkward cause he was sitting like 3 feet away.
oh my god your soo white!
Received first set of page proofs for my bio of late IN congressman Jim Jontz. Excited to see progress in the book's publication this fall.
What's the number for the fairy that stocks mothers' purses with gum and candy? I need to get on her route.
thank you for a good shoot on the set of Blood Ties. I had a great time working with you, Marion, and your whole crew.
Govt wants to regulate online media: Gadkari
Hey - would you consider #MKE for your first north-of-the-Mason Dixon line location?
": I'm not sure anyone even in BCS meetings understands plus-one model. Delany: "It depends on how you define it." #bcs" figures
"choice" is the wrong paradigm for talking about caregiving vs. paid work b/c many of us must work to support our families.
haha aw! i'm so happy for you! i felt the same when i found my ring! lol :-S
Just another one of those days... sigh
a lot can happen in 24 hrs of football - McCarthy sacked, Pompey into administration (to be followed by Rangers!) & Tevez back. Wow
Finding Love is going to be complicated for everyone..... Except me because I'm #foreveralone until that one person shows up..
Considering buying or refinancing? Call Gary Cooper at (858) 376-1299 today to discuss your options.
What's cool about ? Even if you just show up, you can still rate performers on how they #singit, #bringit and #schwingit!
Trend Spotting in 2011: Celebs in DL1961 Premium Denim (PHOTOS) The right jeans are a must for any wardrobe, and there ’s one denim bra
OKC's offensice set that last trip was horrible. they got bailed out on that long shot
Everyone pussied out again today
hope you guys repeat that defense.
And ur uncle lived to tell the story? Was there one woman standing?
No more Nemos! RT I just weighed myself. Time to go hard. Gotta drop 30 lbs real quick
i really hate "no problem" instead of "you're welcome." i know it's not a problem--it's part of your job.
Arranging a gloomy sort of orchestral music, looking for texts for vocal music, trying to think up dance scenarios.
Why yes, Papaw did just give me a Japanese calculator and an outside shower. Gotta love him.
I just go it like a minute ago and I dropped it and theres a scratch on the back t(-_-)t
I'm gonna sleep so good tonight! I am too tired.
That's because it is. Were you not there when I started biting people?!
no it's cute! lol just don't tell him because he might think you are (: haha
Bouts eat some gator meat
Happy Twitter bday! Talked about u 2 yesterday to some FB peeps before their 1st event.
We do not aim to shut any parents out of the conversation. All parents deserve to be real, powerful stakeholders.
#GreenLantern was.... not good. I wouldn't say it was bad, it just.... wasn't good.
Feel like I'm getting sick! NO
if I dont leave my room she will.
We have lost a great friend. Chris Rudolph of Stevens Pass was lost in an avalanche Feb 19th. Prayers are with family and friends. Dan
Too sweet. You just earned more points. Have a blast! “: The only bad thing about this trip is that isn't with me.”
Having fun at Backer show. More stores picking up Max & Ruffy's. Very excited to have our treats in more and more stores!
Manfred Mann's Earth Band >> Charles Mann's Moon Quartet
share your experience about how you shared an armrest w/ a fat person.
lml , yes ! It be actin stupid
Still not feeling great, but back at the office. Today's going to be a long day it seems.
What Ctr were you at?
Can customer in USA subscribe to one of the plans that are offered in the UK, such as £7.99/$12.67 for unlimited USA calls?
that's shit funny
Can't even imagine
A good way to end my years in phi lamb. Last formal.
and co-headlining together? AND having Austin dates? Let's start the party! :D
RT SCORE CEO Yancey wants presidential candidates to show they know small business is critical to economy. Yahoo! Q&A:...
i never actually hated someone, until you came along
I'm in my sister-in-law's ceremony in two weeks, and that certainly helped.
Have you checked out the recompiled and updated version of the Legislative History of the United States Tax Conventions in HeinOnline?
Turned a Stone yesterday and getting our foot purple today at Casa Larga from 10-5.
I love making dumb decisions !
What's going on
How r u? My computer was down for about two weeks. :( It's all better now :)
the other teams goalie, bro
There are a lot of sweet swings in Chicago this time of year, but only has THE SWEETEST SWING IN BASEBALL. Closing weekend!
is it possible that if a .textile has a ? mark in the filename, you can't view it thru the github UI?
thats so beautiful i wanna go
Tonight is beer night ~ nationwide! Hope you were able to sneak out!!
If there's gonna be a fight, I'll be over here singing the theme music from the Kirk/Spock fight in "Amok Time."
Back at ya .. Have a Great weekend ;)
Especially if you bring some booze along :3
Great to see all the Beastie Boys work trending. Too bad a death had to bring it.
want you to know I am a supporter & see you with eyes of hope that you will lead our country for the best of ALL people!
It's been a good day , considering it's a Monday . How about you ? How's your day ?
I need a new environment to live in...who wants to go half on a place with me!!! come on! lol
not much, you?
i'm obsessed with 's youtube videos, i've legit seen every single one LOL love you blair!
I know you have a man-crush on Nas but he has no business dealing wit Nicki Minaj, he's too legendary for that foolery
your obviously lying
coulton?? i thought he left again?!
"Shame is overrated, like Ke$ha. In fact they should rename shame, Ke$hame. I just bought a Ke$ha album, I'm so Ke$hamed."
Hiram is the guy that tugs on #SuperHanahan's cape! Lol
1 week until finals.. NO- more school ;)
Of all people - the poor guy lodt his job RT Some meanie pants douche is heckling Joe Nathan. Shelley loves Joe Nathan.
Congrats Taylor Ashbrook!!! Best guest actress in Comedy!!!!
...clearly I need to start watching
oops, i walked and forgot you. got 10666 steps tho! ;) wanna head over or i can get it tomorrow.
NO, I LOVE YOU MORE KIKI.
Shout outs to , enjoy your birthday!
u there
i play all the champs...can't stick with one i get bored
he pulled a gun on the baby cranking his toy...lmao
RT : The ballplayer who loses his head, who can't keep his cool, is worse than no ballplayer at all. –Lou Gehrig
Where is he speaking?
ADD ME ! ADD ME ! ADD ME! ADD ME ! ( ECHO) LOL IF YOU WANT TO BE ENTERTAINED !
New Ben Folds Five & a cup of coffee. M.
Got my motorcycles license now. That's what's up
I was looking up some ish and came across a underground "Cell" almost like the holocaust underneth the denver airport! Wild!
yuh do the same
thanks bro
I have done nothing but sleep since I got to Texas. 10 hours last night and a 3 hour nap this afternoon. Texas might be heaven, y'all.
when are you going home?
Coochy coo! RT There are some rumors that Romney's team is secretly vetting Charro for the V.P. spot.
Performing w/Chicago Jazz Ensemble Theater- 205 E Randolph Drive-October 7th:30pm - $18-$48 GA & $5 FT Students. All R Welcome
I wish I had more energy on this gorgeous day! The only thing I want to do after work is pass out!!
Omg whoever I marry is definitely gonna love me for my cooking, cause this pasta is on fucking point! yumm!
Thanks Emma!! Will do <3
More homework tomorrow.
I love to slag him, but I feel bad because he manned up for his country. Hope he can continue the tourney.
Happy Friday, Everyone! How do you plan to relax over the weekend?
FER REAL #GIRL! these taggy things are fun though ;)
Carved words hold a life&#39;s story
RT : Eric it was such a special night 4 me. THANKS.
Breaking: car slams into apartment. Sending a crew there now. Austin firefighters called out to an apartment fire, found a man set on fire.
shout me out
Ask and ye shall receive! A brilliant audition video today for the role of "Darlo" in ROCK BOTTOM from a legit rock frontman!
Going, going, gone! Our One Kings Lane sale has ended. Thanks so much for a great event!
I know my opinions on politics, food, art, education, women, raising kids, business has changed over the last 12 yrs...yours hasn't!?!
One morning, as she was waking up from anxious dreams, she discovered that in her bed she had been changed into a composer.
Popin bottles of eggnog Christmas swag
I like stomp the yard ..
Congrats to former and great for being elected to the #CollegeFootball Hall of Fame
was just thinking about JAYBER and wondered if you'd read any further yet...
Siri is the beginning of what happens in iRobot.
Sorry - wish you had another game...
Only 10 more days of school  Goodnight Everyone! :) 
The Far Right (redundant) attacking Obama for remarks on #Trayvon shows how deranged the Far Right has become.
hope demaryius has better grip on football than he does on english language
RT : : "You [industry] didnt invent patients. But they are waiting for someone to lead them."
Oh no, this cat is solid, I deleted the comment from the ahole.
"I feel like we run an animal insane asylum." -- The Girl, as our animals wander like One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest
OMG that looks ridiculously sickly amazing in it's own weird way! Talk about a cardiac arrest waiting to happen.
no...I'm going to Memphis, won't be home till the 4th!! :-( But I'll be there for good later. :-)
It's my first day at work and I'm about to ask for a raise. Wish me luck!
I mean SD
Hi! When calculating a delivery charge, is it per item, or per delivery?
please follow she is you biggest fan!56
Me too! RT helps when I hear talking ;)
My nephew challenged me 2a handstand contest at family reunion. After 2 glasses i felt brave. #togayoga i lost
Rihanna and Coldplay, not bashing them cuz that's too easy. Just sayin' no "wow" factor to their performance at all
Follow me and I'll fllow you
? for you, are educators ever supposed to pay back their school loans when their salaries continue to be slashed?
When you set goals for 2012, concentrate on what you can control. You can control activities more than outcomes. Sales metrics are secret.
You know you are getting excited about Magic, when flipping through cards you say,"oh, that's nice!" - then set in in the 'special' stack.
Just heard about a crash at I-25 and Colorado- CDOT cam shows a major backup-- becareful out there people.
My recent twits line up with the talk on java. My current project is java for many reasons, even though I like clojure, scala, etc.
Thanks a lot, Ryan. We really appreciate your support. See you on Saturday!
stopping by to say hello!
they need to make some real life Movies like some Computer hacking Movies based on true events that took place.
#follow me for a
No guys would buy me chocolate but at least the government will buy me low fat frozen yogurt.
Only I would almost forget to buy potatoes for cheesy potatoes..
I don't care what #georgebush has to say about
So 6 wks after the rest of America, I've fallen in love with #Smash.Should I be 5 yrs late & try #MadMen? Pretty full with #Awake &
Maybe support was the wrong word. But you haven't seen my film and I don't know if you even tried, and Regan gets retweeted.
so is lilgay
really by one point??!? 
My fav school... Hopefully we'll both get in. :)
Thanks for playing the Morning Mindbender and congrats to who got the correct answer which is....
Sorry for the late reply, but that is just wrong! 0_0 Lol. But good for her!
OOMF Need To Stop Buying Gucci Belt & Shit && Invest It In Some Lotion ... GUESS WHO IT IS .... lol
Singin* All I Need Iz Mary Mary Mary ...I Dont Need No Otha Drug *Then Takes A Puff
It's Already Done Started. Labels W/Their "Stick To The Script Mentality" Cornering Artists To All Rap About The Same Things Or Else.
Hope you are having a great day as well!
Just finished watching #Glee. Finn wants to be an actor! Aww, I love you Finn. I really do.
just asked if we can go to the bathroom together at the same time shell just straddle me.... #creep #freak #nasty #mental 😳😷
Hi there, I'm sorry to hear this. If you'd like to discuss, please email me rachel (at) thestantonsocial (dot) com. -Rachel
Fellas, would you still marry your girl if she demanded you change your last name and not hers?
A state trooper was released from the hospital yesterday- after recovering from a hit and run incident in Lynn
Healthy Eating Tips - Better Fitness Today Eat a variety of nutrient-rich foods. You need more than 40 different nutrients for good...
bahahahaa only you would tweet about kicking buttholes
GO. BIG. BLUE.
I can't stand a cry baby ass dude!
Those dogs that always bark, but never bite.
Tip 1: Attractive - You can improve your appearance to women by watching your weight and paying attention to the way you dress.
Just missed it
Ditto! RT And I expect #DCDrinkup to be trending by the time we're done tonight! ;-)
Lovely shot!
Worth it AND totally healthy. ;)
Hook 'Em Texas!
I only really tweet when im drunk
what did 8 flavahz ever do to us though-
Happy 11/1/11! Get some R&R in this month with Riviera Spa's steals and deals.
and what beat is that homie?
thanks for the FF
My Hand Writng Is So Big . One Sentace Takes Up 7 Lines Of Paper . ;o Lol .
Ooh, that closing sentence. ZING!
we'll be twittering postsecret this Thursday.
its ight. Loll.
can we frame and hang the ones you have first?
I think I ate too much cheese this weekend. Totally worth it though.
lol :p how was the gym?
working on a halting problem assignment and the real question is when will the working on it halt
hey Bev! Posted a tweet really quick yesterday an hopped off. Sorry I missed you. Hope you are having a great Wednesday though!
BTW I'm in Gilbert, AZ these days but grew up on Las Vegas - gigged there & Laughlin from '86 - '97
So much homework , ugh summer please hurry.
Absolutely - our pleasure! We're thrilled to welcome you to the DC family!
No idea what that says but I'm guessing we'll talk later! hahahaha love you!
That's y I like dogs better.
Thank you!
latest video strip greatest video ever Amazing watching the video right now Follow 
I lied, it was 76W.
What type of job u looking for?
thanks guys! I appreciate the support. It makes a difference
#didyouknow? The lion used in the original MGM movie logo killed its trainer and two assistants the day after the logo was filmed.
The art of being wise is knowing what to overlook.William James
I can't stand that bitch in the library.. When I try to be productive I get shut down.. Dumb hoe
Great! Let us know what you think.
what's happening BRO?
Join our Film Alumni for an event 1/31 at 6pm on the DC Campus with a Special presentation by Arlington Independent Media.
Yo Unc, she got any pets??? Holla... at... cha.... boy... ps, I'm learning to read. i know like 4, nine, 12 words. gettin it
Can I send an 8-1-1 this morning to have my ex removed from my property?
Will have to miss #lrnchat tonight, sometimes you just have to do f2f networking!
Are you guys still planning to let media outlets know how to apply for embargoed access to the rest of the cables?
:( i didnt even get a delay 2day
COLD. BORED. HUNGRY. SLEEPY. PIANO :L
>>>Thank you very much!
Will cloud player come to iOS?
I know. I was thinking the same thing. Isn't it funny you and I both follow
i think yall forgot or suttin, like i aint high or suttin, like i dont make your girl take off her top or suttin, hahahahaha LMAO
Walking in the rain first thing in the morning is always fun
good luck, nerd! :)
Sophisticated Styles in Charmeuse Bridesmaid Dresses- Layered Innovations at www.Shopshop.com
Idgaf about this damn literature.
Making melancholia identifiable among African slaves by Carolyn Roberts at
At Austin Songwriters symposium listening to social media panel with , Austin chronicle, Austin music weekly.
I can't believe you didn't know about Gosling's band.
The hipster examples currently coming from #emac4372 course are totally making my afternoon.
for stupid shit!
Can't wait to see your adorable face and amazing dancing on my tv :)
Price on Trever Miller's jersey?
privatizing schools harms kids. Public edu is not a product to serve parents. It is a public good.
RT : Use social to show consumers that a brand is human… build an emotional connection that will grow Trust & Loyalty.
Ha I forgot about
Come visit the Alliance in ICMA Pavilion during Welcome Reception !
The Phillies no longer have a losing record and all is right the world
When ppl "SAY" they go do something I tend not to believe then cuz
that's my shxt!
If I agreed with you we'd both be wrong.
I've never done hard drugs, but I can't imagine something more addicting than girl scout cookies.
💯 keeping it that way
We aren't great dog people, but if your mom can't find anyone else, I suppose we beat nothing.
very cool looks like a great time!!
gonna google butt songs for
Hey! .. I doubt you will see this
So. Freaking. Tired
Couldn't agree more. And think of all the iron you get, just by cooking in it!
Someone must had a bad twitter day did you lose some Friends
Entertainment needed now
These fucking beaners think they can do anything! Fucking annoyed! Ugh!
i strive to make someone happy each day.
Its cold ashell in here -.-
That moment when someone skinnier than you says "I'm so fat." and you stand there like (-_-')
#BoiseSOC Bieter: I'm working with school district to ensure a portion of the Franklin site is acquired by the City for a future park.
Anyone can quit their job after they win millions. I'd have the utmost respect for anyone who quit their job before they won. Show of faith.
Everyone follow she has amazing tweets and always follows back. She is a #TrueMahomie <3 RT if you followed her ill do SHOUTS
This is the best $40 I've ever spent. We would still be on the interstate otherwise...
yes! There were a lot of girls waiting by the busses &he came out to play with us for a bit then went into soundcheck
That talking "Snuggle" bear in that fabric softener commercial is super creepy.
Be blessed, my friend!
People will find anything to make money off of!
#oscars octavia spencer love you. She deserved it.
I beat the pussy uuuuuppppp yeah * Repeat this chorus because that's the only part you know besides "up up up up up up up I beat the etc." *
may #GodBlessAmerica & may
I'd like to go to Seattle and Vancouver
That's an awesome gift! Have you seen any changes in your habits & mindset within the real estate world since the conference?
Thanks for the follow, Rick! Congrats on your success!
haha hey follow me!
If you're chasing me, I promise to run slow <3
Chocolate and any kind of fruit is pure heaven.
Didn't you have a spurs lanyard? RT : Just for the record... If you really know me... You know im a SPURS fan !
My first quote of the night "Tools can be the subtlest of traps" via
I miss the way my family used to get together & grill, hire a dj & party, and have fun!!
thank you Sarah , can't wait..
When Steven Tyler says "Welcome to burger king honey!" >>> he sounds so flamboyant. xD
I think you were hacked? The "Photo" link set off virus alerts.
Enjoyed the ambiance and wines. The menu degustation was just OK. Crab galette was under seasoned. Fish overdone. :(
Great reading by tonight at #OpenMic. Glad you came! for being here!
never believed that things happened for a reason.
thank you so much for your retweet!!!
Seattle totally is a much bigger Brooklyn
On my #Philly bucket list: Eat my first Philly Cheesesteak. Any rec's for where to get the best one?
nah, the crowds and the traffic are not the bomb.
Looking forward to tomorrow morning's call w/ Linda Bollinger of
..i wonder if i can stop to bk for a croissant, Starbucks for a vanilla coffee, and dd for a donut or 3; and still make it to work ON TIME!!
oh, yes, please! I'm a serial unplugger of those 80's-style bedside alarm clocks.
for business or relocating?
New video clip for sign up instruction has been updated on help. If you are stuck, just click it!. Better and easier!
ITS ALL YOUR FALT
Psh, you were NEVER being nice.
Calf cramps. Aw man!
told you man!!!
I heart you two!
it's one of those stories to me that I never wanna stop reading. It's seriously perfect!
RT : By repealing Obamacare, we will save $1 trillion dollars in the near term and more over time. That's a fact.
Money can't buy you happiness. I'm calling bullshit!
lolol shut up I wake up at 6 am err day (excluding weekends)
Madbeast/Ghost of The Machine at The Worthen House this Saturday May 12th at 9 pm! will be covering this event!
hope u guys r ready for the champs
Yay guess everyone going to marley fest ❤💛💚
I will be running for that foundation.
Happy St Patricks Day!
Q:How do u know if the relationship is worth fighting for if all u do is fight 1 another?
It's a beautiful day to talk books. #JustRead anything lately?
*Calling my mom, she answers* me:momma, do you love me? My mom: what devin? Me: wha-- you--do you not love me?
Great! Let's talk before your next session. Where can I find you?
thx - enjoyed spending Friday with you all!
see you there.
More than favorite. Same here, alicia bee. RT : My biggest goal in life is to be proud of myself. And I'm well on my way.
Own it.
I MISS MY BOYFRIEND :-(
I'm dietary Fiber.
killed That mix tape. I needed that. Back to the studio I go
oh I know, been there too
Itz nice as crap outside. I might go outside in these chinese slippers.
When choosing the type of light you wish to use, it is necessary to know what type of light is emitted from what lamps
So...I took a left turn into on-coming traffic today. On the upside, I'm getting an oil change (after 7,000 miles) & my tires rotated! :)
and me xDD
Holdin on and hangin in there like everybody else.
One more day 'till vacation. Northwoods livin' for a week, then off to the Oklahoma plains to build some wind farms.
In the DC or Tulsa area? Tomorrow morning check out Daily Grill on your local news - Good Morning Tulsa and WUSA-TV in DC.
Gettin readdy for school :)) hope today goes good
Woke up this morning to the sad news of Jack Layton's passing. Canada has lost a great politician, and a good man. Gone too soon.
A #BFHistoryLesson - today in 1306 Robert the Bruce was crowned king of
thank you
I know its super late but thanks for the MM!
The greatest injustice is using the law to keep justice at bay - Scott Adams
Hi Justin, noticed your tweet, would love to hear where we are going wrong.
just thought i would let you know about the vineyard vines friends and family sale 25% off . please use code : nsboston
Never thought I'd say this but I wish I didn't have a fucking phone right now.
“: Yogi Ferrell > Marquis Teague” Gna kill it here at #IU next year.
I'll be 18 in less than 2 hours
It's Groundhog Day! Looking for something to do to celebrate? Pull out your phone and use AirYell to find entertainment near you!
Alright Przybilla. Go suit up.
Happy Birthday, Woody Herman!
So do you think the two huge biscuits and my loaded baked potato cancelled out our run?
nope.. I should tho if they really work
I have not tried the shake; I did have the bacon popcorn from the truck and it was pretty good!
The secret to not overeating is wearing really tight pants.
Please Help support They need your support.
There was just enough milk in the bottom of the cheerios for the last 3 bites.
its been good how about yours
Go watch TBN right now ...
thanks Ang*! I can't even imagine how long it took you to make that little graphic.
Looking forward to #TheBrothersSize tonight!
Come in Blake's office and watch with me!
I think this conversation could've gone better...cute!
dance moms in ap u.s
First rehearsal starts in twenty minutes!!! So excited!
Thank you!
i know! that's the best part!!
Thanks to momz to she coulda easily got a abortion appreciate it
Putting a baby in a freezer. Only in
Another martini, ?
girl you shock me, I love Adele & her music, rolling in the deep., is my fav by her. So how was ur visit to MI?. LOVE UR SHOW.
Looking forward to the #Masters and rootin for the Golf Boys! (no particular order)
WHY DIDN'T YOU TELL ME KIMCHI IS MADE WITH FISH SAUCE
good plan. Tht way we can do a good search, get money, and see how our schedules r gonna work out
i folllowback all my followers! so if you followed :) i will follow back ! Thankyouu<3
For education, change definition of infrastructure from asphalt to access.
you know i got you darling....let me get this website up and promote promote promote
Charlie Batch almost grabbed his old leather helmet when he went in the game.
Wishing the best of luck on her trip to Fiji tomorrow. :)
lets go to a bisons game haha
#Showers & t'storms continue to pop up in #NewMexico, but not everyone gets 'em. I'll show you where they're the most likely tonight on KOB!
I say it Moscow with the w
3 days in the tomb / now he's back from the dead? / Jesus! Run for it!
I love him to. <3
Theres still 5 letters there though. Just like "there" is still a 5 letter word. But yah I see whatcha mean.
We will make sure that all of you Negroes find a spot to crash. :)
Loving the college life.
She always wants to give me a "WOW" gift, so this will do the trick. :)
THURSDAYS @ ALOFT (Tempe) Check out Diva Dj's Featuring DJ DESIGN!!
Management of Student Discipline: Proficent
Actually I read somewhere that "Itchycoo Park" was hated by the band as they were not really a psychedelic band at all.
My friend, Dave Damiani and his big band are playing Micelis, Universal City tonight! 8:30pm, no cover, NO MINIMUM! 3655 Cahuenga Blvd. West
happy late bday!!
When I visited the Chicago Stock Exchange in 1986 with Cameron and Sloan, the DOW was around 2000. Will we see it again?
RT : It's #followamuseum day! Pls follow a museum and RT this message. My two local faves are and
So, it's the weekend and you want to go out. What's stopping you? Seriously, what are your reasons?
food court. Where r u?
Artclix just won gold in mobile apps category - will be in our panel tomorrow 2 pm "Can mobile interpretation also be social?'
being single for a long time, must be lonely
Uh oh! Getting sick...in need of soup
It’s a beautiful day for a drive, isn’t it?
Thanks for the RT, - I wish I knew how to do that.
Formula PR with ... it is a three month internship! i am over the moon excited!
When you mess up a guy's hair he thinks its cute but when you mess up a GIRL'S hair.. just really hope you're wearing something bulletproof.
if the tour starts after may 23rd imma cry
i've got a peaceful easy feeling and I know you won't let me down.
Please, just love me.
u,u,u lock ur profile omg fyii
starting to look at the Android SDK; as if I don't have enough already to do...
nothing short of a miracle, that!
Stop looking for someone to make u happy, and start looking for someone who cares about ur happiness
If I love you, I'm willing to go the distance, walk the miles, cry the tears, forgive the mistakes, and make the memories.
Having a great time at National History Day DC city-wide competition at GWU. Fun to see kids excited about history!
MAMAMAHONE MAMAMAHONE MAMAMAHONE MAMAMAHONE PLEASE FOLLOW ME! I LOVE YOU AND I LOVE YOUR SON! :D
Also: Ted Turner, Holly Hunter, Spike Lee, Tyler Perry, Julia Roberts, Whitney Houston, John Mayer, Antwan Patton, Shawn Mullins, IndiaArlie
Hopin to have a better start to that day than that.
Another reason why Len is a top 5 Followable on Twitter. So happy for you man!
I tell students to choose on interest, but feel frustration w below rdg level selections or when students are stuck in a genre
ha ok. No worries! If I have an issue later on, I'll let you know. Luckily we use mostly white paper and white backgrounds here
oh ok sorry I didn't know
cheap mixed margarita lol
A beautiful moment in a woman's life is when she tells her hubby she's pregnant & he looks at her & says, "How could you do this to me?" lol
Oh animation students, you are a whole other breed of film student (no offense to my animation amigos).
i wanna thank my new follwers u kno who u are
look closely and you'll find those aren't pumpkins... yes, my mind is very twisted... lol
Moody is what I am
So nice to have you! :) RT : Pumped to be back at the office after 4 wks out in Denver! Missed my co-workers and friends :)
If anyone knows anything about me you know where I'm on my way to
Awesome!!!! Congrats to you too! That is a very powerful list your on too. Great people!
Complimentary clothes & #makeup makes U look & feel good, which makes you magnetically powerful & confidant just by being your best.
My boyfriend is like a trampoline. I don't have a trampoline.
A Yo Watts, How You Like Ya Pussy? Wet, Clean, and Bald
awe im glad!
Being a family guy, I think would use #kiddori if he installed it on his ;-)
Who would you rather skinnydip with? Chaz Bono or a hammerhead shark?
That was pretty good! The beat.. sick!
will you ever come to Chicago
yes love I'll be right there ;)
It's Two Stamp Twitter Tuesday! Show us that you follow us on Twitter and receive an extra stamp on your stamp card.
Me gusta!! “: as long as i get to wear a handkerchief on my head and sunglasses, like Thelma and Louise! (Jas)”
Beyond the Roomba: How iRobot’s Technology Is Making War Zones Safer for Soldiers
Damn. Battery bout to die
“: Solid wave makes its way around Rogers arena. #Canucks” The "wave" isn't hockey!!!
Putting off my run until the caffeine I just consumed kicks in.
:O thats far i live like on the otherside .....
Are you excited for June 22nd?
thanks for the follow. When and where is your clearer event to San Diego??
Live music just started here at the store! Come see us!
My first fantasy baseball draft of the year is in the books. Miguel Cabrera owners should be concerned now that Bonini Cloud floats above.
Ken Corbett on bullying, really thoughtful.
well thanks! i appreciate it :D.
RT : If we added racinos to the #healthcare cost bill, would DeLeo show some urgency?
me too
just watched new Sunny...WAY OVER THE TOP!
#SomeWomenCantStand liars; here's a secret women not all men lie
": & your favorite bartender lol. i am now gonna serve you drinks a whole different way ;)" in what way? Haha
I love her
Bored in spanish
good 4 you!!
Great dinner last night Great service from Crystal. I'll be back soon!
Cause I hate that you breath I see you duck you lil punk you lil fuckin disease I got 9lives bitches but a snitch aint one
Done trying
Me and #oomf will never part. No matter what!
RT Quick question...does the Kindle Fire have a backlight, or whatever so there's no sun glare?
all domains are set to 1 request / 3 sec unless they are in the top 1M, then we use traffic as a rubric for crawl rate
New on DVD & Blu-Ray: Horrible Bosses, Green Lantern, Terri, The Tree of Life + more! Thumbs up or down?
#ThingsIwantTheMost #iwish would press the follow button tonight<3 #HOPING you read this(:
Bummer - the Twins didn't do quite as good in your game as did in mine! 1 run in two games?! We still had fun though ;)
Hope you have a nice Thanksgiving! xo
Q: How many editors does it take to change a lightbulb?A: It was supposed to be in place last week!
Just finished a 7.5K run. Guess there's some life in the old corpus yet.
LOL @ the people who are always worried about me
Profoundly indebted to my roommate for DVRing The Malibu Bikini Shop last night. Pure cinematic pain. Another way of saying pure joy.
Great Song! Who doesn't like Nelly???
Building community one tweet at a time. P.S. You're invited...
About to be on Wisconsin's Afternoon News talking about Barrett's campaign hours before polls open for Tuesday's primary.
did you see the article on...Jezebel I think about Missoula?
don't forget the book exhibit on the fourth floor. 20% off. Maybe more. Plus I need someone to talk to.
#truth RT : Helping others is the way we help ourselves. -Oprah
No weapon formed against me shall prosper.
Just met a super bright grad looking to join the online community world in SF. My bet? She'll be snatched up right-quick.
huh, the arrow that shows up over the wrench in Chrome when there's an update gets darker and darker the longer I ignore it.
For the past few mornings MPH has been trending. Why is that? It's hard to keep up, Tweeps.
haha , I got a feelin u r :)
This is my dream, I will decide where it will go from here. ~ Alice in Wonderland
I'm dirty sprite forever.
See... I knew it! So It's not just me. This sort of shit happens to everyone all the time.
Amen : Be transparent. Be childish. Be something to somebody, nothing to nobody & never be afraid to get lost.
#Experience is something that u needed to go through. If there is no test, there can be no
I refuse to believe in non-apocalyptic truth.
and I are skipping school tomorrow to chase unicorns. Bye.
Hey if yu wanna job at walmart better apply while they're hiring before its too late..just sayn
Turn my heart toward your statutes and not toward selfish gain. Psalm 119:36
Russ is going to have to win it for cards now
Judges being moved into deliberation room! Stay tuned!
can you please play Payphone by Maroon 5(: Thanks
Yes don't you? ": Do you think John Edwards broke the law, using campaign contributions to cover up his affair?
Walk.Off.
If you're a Realtor and you haven't looked at text marketing you will be left behind in the next 6 months. Simple as that! www.zesmo.com
It's not an easy thing to do so am proud of all yall who try to take that step to make your life better
You be with that!!! what u doing hoe?
I'm going to have to find a way through this though.
Loving the weather !!!
Um. On packed 3A - just passed by 3B, 15L, and the 10+ min late 3Y for which I had been waiting.
hahah, I wish thats all i needed to know!! But the effort is appreciated!
But would they walk 500 more?
how many reb for Porter?
Or very little...Klein, Rhee, Duncan...on and on...ass kissing is essential to get the top jobs.
..well, we all make choices....
Breathe in the New Year!
Your editing voice is terrific! You were born w/ the Twitter writing gene- wishing for Twitter app to 'convert' thinking to 140!
Just made my own new icon. Just temporary...
Thanks for my first win at Hero Academy LtDeng 🏆
We had a contractor working for us once who lived quite a distance away (for the UK!) and was usually late in because of traffic problems...
Dude. I'm just now getting to Once Upon A Country....
3 and a half days of school left! It's taking forever for this week to end
#yea i'm dirty dirty,i sip henn an exhale smoke kush ,she wanna blow back,but i rather count a stack,big paper always make a nigga dik hard
So ole fubu guy I think his name is Damon right...actually has a heart...lol....na he was moved with compassion and wanted to help.Nice!
Why? Because you're getting a mani / pedi right now?
How can conflicts with LCC suppliers be resolved over standards and techniques used to measure them?
We're getting a sneak peek at an inspiring story about a cheerful mailman slated to run later this week
Just realized that my favorite #frozenyogurt spot in Wilsonville is no longer there. Big bummer on such a beautiful day!
Mrs. Ford R. Jessop sent me a check for $25.00 to give to the Red Cross because she likes Thank you, Mrs. Jessop. [1944]
day 2 of the ASHA convention
I love you guys youre both so funny! Much love<3 xx
ACR 4 being discussed on Asm Floor. Feuer now speaking in support.
She watches over the ways of her household, and does not eat the bread of idleness. —Proverbs 31:27
I'm sad and lonely. I miss my baby boy, even if he is a cantankerous 21 yo, frustrated with his life, wanting to go back to college, no job.
Unless someone likes a good pinot and wants to come with ;) $20
Are the referees are gonna hand Kentucky the game!!!!
Happy 14th Anniversary to the pill boston. We've spent many nights on their dancefloor and are psyched to be playing there in December.
I love you do much that I'd dye your shirts with MiO
Love the new photo and landing page. Thx for inspiring. And thanks for the tip on the antispec.com project- I added my support.
BOOK A STAR for your NEXT EVENT!!! Send offers and price list requests to DNS Agency for ALL your booking needs!
Agree& it's what we do RT Student-athletes don't need to be "policed" on social media. need 2 be educ./empowered 2 use well
Greenwood, Indiana...Home of the Famous Hill City Hot from Happy Jack's...if you like spicy chili sauce...this dog is for you...Dang Good!
"I thought we did ok" - Metta World Peace
That's a long time to have it!
. Continues to harass me in violation of FDCPA. Manager at VZ Plaza refuses to assist me. Referred me to arbitration.
Last we checked, october 16th!
having a love affair with the Italians right now. Fruity, bold, good to their mothers, it's a win :)
Build files work so much better if MySQL Server is already running when you get to the part that inserts data into the database. Sigh.
what's good G I'm n the Chi
Don't do it. RT: Tanya huang Of course I would get a flaming fever just in time for xmas. Not the least bit surprised anymore.
lol ....no worries everyone watches it...nothing is wrong w/ it! lmao I'm a big fan ; )
Things I can't wait for to be over: 1) today 2)NFL draft 3) finals
They called it Twitter because Everybody Poops was taken.
RT : Happy early Thanksgiving everyone! yoga is canceled tomorrow but will resume class on Mon. the 28th at 5:15 pm
you go girl that's singing Marry You (:
Fly Golden Eagle was awesome...really tight set.
I kind of wonder if I cross ya mind...safe to say somewhere there’s a disconnection.
5 months we were together . Now its just the end . Maybe the 2 time i wont feel so lonely .
Awesome!! And great victory dance too. LOVED IT! Faith, Hope, Truth, and Love!
Long day im exhqusted
its a middle finger :(
I do not pray for a lighter load, but for a stronger back. - Phillips Brooks
Good Morning...
yes I am too :D
Nice. The "My God, My God," is a favorite.
I see you! Lets have a play date. just do it!
I swear I love the library work gets done at a good pace I must say
love your documentary oh my gosh so inspiring !
#BornThisWaySlaysExpressYourself #Madonna is the grandma of pop so go kill yo self bitch is the QUEEN of POP bow down to the best
yes I just finished my 5k for the day ..... time to prepare for work...
Gas and Shottas
Omgeee!! It finally snowed outside yayyyy!! El oh el c:
My mom: " Gosh, I wish I could stay in AZ w/ you longer. I'd like to ride through the desert on a horse w/ no name."
Haha I know!!:)
Getting really emotional listening to bieber
I love when a guy knows you like him but then he talks to your friends that he doesn't know at all and completely ignores you......
dream big
looks good! I want to go!
Same thing across the league. Some form of replay is needed, at least on goals and red cards.
S/O to for the avi design
Watch Terrible People. You're not doing anything better right now, are you? www.terriblepeopleshow.com
I Dm you
#inlove its in the air
Getting outside of our comfort zone is the only way we grow! Well said!
It wasn't personality, it was skill-set. Same thing that's cost me the last few jobs.
Fuck it though, if you are a big time HW director, you should choose to shoot on 35mm if you want. Can't let it die.
reading issackson's book on steve jobs - fantastic read!
am i gunna see you tonight at the game?
Look beyond rejection, see beyond limits, think around the bend in the road. Today is beautiful Xoxo
I missed this tweet. I would love to stay with you guys if you will have me. I would like to treat for Gators then too!
Youtube videos, shitty websites, and loons who occasionally make sound points don't work here.
TrueBlood rocked tonight only 2 left:((
It's kind of chilly out today. Hope the weather warms down soon. Enjoy your day everyone!
Why isn't anyone following my personal twitter ?
Let's go #Kottaras!!!! Do it again!!! #Brewers!
Anyone interested in sharing a Twin room or cluster unit at #dhsi2012? We have 3 ppl and are looking for a 4th.
Oh yeah... It's on! been going strong for 12 hours plus!
Not to mention the complete lack of advanced searching?! (Or maybe I'm just missing it...)
Looking for an extra Big Pour second session ticket for my bro.
too bad budget was balanced before gov walker took office. He gave away a bunch of money and CAUSED the problem.
i wish everyone happy holidays and happy new year because i'm going to be in israeli on family trip and i will have no computer.
I miss high school
Looks like your thunder's been stolen again! C'mon, it's your BIRTHDAY
Much appreciation to Dallas! You guys are the best!!! Thanks for the follow
I'm the type of brother that tell it how it is. I never sugar coat anything.
wfh today and son just agreed to do his weekend's reading homework now after school, in exchange for playing angry birds on my iphone. lol
What's up with this year?
If I had a nickel for going to an audition that called for a navy polo and khakis; guess who would have a pocket full of change?
With all the fancy grocery stores using loopholes to sell beer now, it's more important than ever to support #local bottle shops.
glad you enjoyed dangerosa's last set at black cat, would love to see you friday with
I couldn't do it either. Even with the $500!
Just got done making braised rabbit rigatoni for Chef's Collabrative on Monday, yum! Thx Lucky Pig Farms and San Juan Island Pasta Co!!!
We are going to begin the World Health Day Twitter chat in 3 minutes. Tune in!
ha how cute.
We utilize twitter 4 advertising our products and it works. Just cause it's easy doesn't make it bad.
The awkward when you read "moment" even though it wasn't there.
dont forget to brush your teeth and was your face....say your prayers cuz lord knows your gonna need them..bahahaha
RT : Internet appears to be back except Google reader still won't load in chrome. Thanks for that sucky weekend, ISP
yes, yes, yes! That's all I wanted to know! Thanks can't wait
RT : ...one of your G's must stand for Gangsta! Lol #Shahs << Stop lying to her..she gunna get beat up one day ....
My Wealth Goal is2 help ERADICATE Proverty. It is More than Enough in this world for every1 to have the Basics, No Need2Profit Standin on 1
the north Korea one... Whoa.
No exaggeration, condos bellow $ 80s (Hallandale) Condos below market price in Hallandale, very affordable close to shopping, and transport
So, you watch an issue trend. It spikes upwards. Is it significant? Know for sure with #attensity hotspotting in Analyze v6.0
OK Brock let's calm down. Its not his fault he's from Boston
Tollefson going to Raiders?????
"Books like friends, should be few and well-chosen." - Samuel Johnson
Whats your weekend plans?WORK PARTY WORK IS MINE
lol nah, you just missed me earlier..
Deputy supe of biz Phil Stover just gave list of possible closures under Barrera's motion to board. Barrera reading now
Milwaukee I missed you!! It was great filling in this week on -- see you soon!
but kboe got smart and went bald
fun! Text me when you get there so we can meet up! (:
my favorite DJ khaled video is "All I Do is Win"
Intermission. Just looked up. Amazing how many other people are on their iPhones too!
thanks for looking into it! Appreciate it :)
she looks like a MESS
love the idea of designing your workspace to promote staying fit!
I sure they do, that's a human response to killing a innocent helpless unborn soul!!!!
Sorry but im not falling for it this time .
they call that kind of misdirection a "sususudio"
get it to me by Friday (going to some tech trade show + got a robo call reminding me that they'll be demoing a shredder).
Take advantage of year end close outs...678-668-0075
yeah, the scythe through the face did it for me... That episode was intense!
That last tweet speaks to a publishing trend that, in this age of digital reading, I would've hoped would change: the bias against novellas
Thunder scares me ):
when I did have certain cast members #'s they would never return my call. So I stopped & deleted the math.
social anxiety or sexual addiction???lol what do u mean
Justin Bieber's lock of hair sold for $40,000 on eBay. is #winning!
Yea right!
I wish I had a clone that could cover for me.
Love da world
Living life to the fullest
vienna and prague! i can't wait to blog about my adventures this week, with plenty of pictures :) for now, i'm off to see a castle
YAY! How was it?
RT Public-private partnerships essential to making curricula relevant and connecting education to jobs
Dennis Johnson, dfw, Karen Russell
Weird, I've had two clients in the last week that want to pay me to give them cooking lessons. Hmm. Anyone else interested?
Driving back to Seattle after spending time w/ family honoring my cousin Ray. I am very fortunate to have such a loving, caring family.
thank you bianca.. Happy holidays
Find something that will whisper the full value of life.
yo #ifiruledtheworld i would enslave white people so they could finally understand
#NowPlaying "Little By Little" by The Chicharones
if you do RIGHT no one remembers. if you do WRONG no one forgets.
Okay, if there's a misu8nderstanding, why the upset?
what u doing tonight
U got that! ;) RT : Crazy stressed, in need of prayer
Adrienne I thought I knew you. Once again you used me!
Ocean view? Oh I might be okay with this then... Thank you!
I guess sleep was a little too much to ask for with everything else happening! Oh well. Sleep when I'm dead? Let's hope so.
Lots of people with "Vote for Libraries" pins loitering in Hart. Wonder what they want.
Feckarewe: We took the High Road but went on the low roads.
damn for real? No cops? I'm bout to be bold then
Im here if you need me
My dog is named after a phenomenal man. And also it's very hard to call his name after being in love with someone with the same.
Thank you! RT : Had the bacon guacamole burger while I was in town. Best burger I've ever had!
i refuse to see that piece of shit
Nice, mile day inland, cloudy and cool beachside. Expect upper 60s on the sand but then low 70s once your cross the 5 & 80s in the valleys.
looking forward to it! Let me know if you need any help.
#3WordsForYou you're kidding, right?
I'm in the Empire State! new yoooorrk
Hiring for a Web Apps tester in OR - jQuery and HTML5 #EdgeLink. Please RT.
yes I know. I'm an idiot. Lol
T-Plush with the gonzo slide for the win! (Don't look at the replay too closely...)
Please tell us about products you dearly love. We are looking for quality business and consumer products to add to our website.
i hope that you know it , you are growing and for us is very emocional , and will never leave you ! we loveU13
As we sail thru life, don't avoid rough waters, sail on because calm waters won't make a skillful sailor.
sound great! Submitted, thanks again- you guys are awesome.
She makes me crazy...the minute I hear "the whisper" I go into the fetal position. xox
I have a green thumb for marijuana..
Why did we even get out a hour early?
Only three more weekends to shop our Upholstery Sale! 15% off all stock, stock plus and custom upholstered items. Shop now, and save!
get your big booty up and look for a job or i will personally be upset with kykoku you
Lawyers: Check. Ryan Roberts Trio at the Fed tonight: Coat Check.
will donate 25% of profit from Jan 31 event to Camp Kesem. Your prices stay same, bring out your books for a great cause!
RT : #HappyMonday! We hope U all had an exceptional weekend. We had a gr8 time w/ at opening!...
Yes I love that stuff!
Another Congrats goes out to the class of 2011 here in New Mexico.
oh foursquare.
I hope you have applied or a DH grant from the foundation. This sounds like some great software.
We're putting the finishing touches on the Silent Auction for Back-to-School Bash this Saturday. We're still taking donations.
Full moon tonight. Jacob if you aren't outside my window fighting with Edward I will cry... #Justsaying :P
panic at the disco
I knew it, today is my lucky day
3. There are 889 scam reports on women called olga were found.
24 miles, daily round trip on my bike, says no to belly fat! :-)
Set goals for yourself for a balanced life. Need to lose weight? Write down how much & plan your steps. Focus on the positives.
Appeals within a dictatorship are seldom successful unless the dictator winks.
wow twitching no toes curled yes but twitching wow that wud be sum kinda superhead there
I want one where can I get it in Indianapolis?
Damn everybody leaving nobody to go to Jwu graduation with
Just woke up so happy my cincinnati bengals won
Lunch time! Check out all the great by slice choices we have today. And remember, today is double punch day on your punch card.
#CAbarexam so drained. This fucking thing is sucking my will to live. Thursday predictions? Corporations, Torts, Civ Pro. See you there
ew don't make fun of me or I'll chop your arms off 1 by 1 and feed them to your presh cats.
I am not bitter it is the problem of others and I can not fix their problems only God can so pray for them that hurt others!
#uicdae session on mutimedia captioning: l learned that #UIUC is captioning silent movies to convey the mood of the background music
#fflv tonight in #downlownlv! Check out Emergency Arts and MP art! 100% guartantee NO twisters, snow or rain!
...a sip of my goddamn juice. -___-
Dont talk big if your not big lol
"You can not always control circumstances, but you can control your own thoughts." - Charles Popplestown
Who let grandma drive???
Seek the friend who's hand helped you and tell them what they mean to you.
Companies, like people, should never change who they are so others will like them. They should find those who like them for who they are....
no i grade it online
Dear world, I'm now ready to start the begging / bargaining part of the night. So yeah... Name a price.
hahaha you were right!! I seriously didn't know that was true..
"Do not become less my smartitude" lol
Happy #EarthDay fellow members of the planetary ecosystem!
I GO CRazy When I hEar She Is My IDol
Working on a bad wheel today. I guess at 38 I should be jumping fences while playing tag with my kids. #growingoldgracefully?
Training time ! Fav part of day !!!
I did Harrah's last week. When I heard u were coming, I palm striked every headshot on the wall to warn them
Good morning people remember to smile, you just might make someone's day better.
can u go with me tomorro to show me where that agency is please :)
Open Studios is spring and fall.
this one's closed to public. Auditioning a new chef.
Anyone have Xbox live? Add me as a friend!
last week in freelancing: [redacted due to problematic iPad Spell Tower issue].
Gotta love Hayleigh & Drew from the gym with the convos we have & Jenn for being such a good sport ;) doing her leg exercises
Gearing up for trip to San Diego for MW 2012!! Arriving Thursday morning.
So, "glass break" alarm is going off and nobody's home. Where's Dog the Bounty Hunter when you need him?
woow. my whole facebook wall is filled with statuses about school starting tomorrow..
Palm Beach International Equestrian Center tomorrow for some balloons and fire breathing!
Click on the doc title from your manage docs page to bring the details. You can add tags that are notes that only you can see.
Lol, :) You would know that very well. *Insert manly burp here* xD
how did I know u were on twitter? :O
What's your all-time favorite Rolling Stones song?
just wake up and I driveing to the store and geting me a pepsi
DM me your email address, and I'll send you details!
. I hope they take this exact cast to Broadway no funny stuff...no switching up for a name. It’s absolute perfection!
I Hope I Meet Lauryn Hill One Day
MicroSoft Dynamics CRM is really a worthless program
fuck one, marry one, kill one. #GO! Im sure Jionni would kill
This is a competition
Waiting to get this haircut.
Jonathan makes me so proud! Big things are going to happen in his life. Im so proud of him! 👏
Republican politicians, great salesmen, horrible managers. What good have they done for anyone. Where is job creation.
would like to hear more about how the text analysis works if you are willing to share....
When I get on my computer I will follow you.
Get exposure today for free post highlight tapes and photos we want to help college coaches find you
It's amazing how even though we're both homemakers, we still can't get together unless it's @ the playground. Lol
How do you overcome your struggles?
your awesome thank u!!!
Hey, there's a whole uncooked Amish chicken in the fridge. Wait, it's been there for 10 days. Uh...
Have u every seen an ugly throat???
She drew a wedgie??
still have yet to see a lady aves lax game I must admit
Everyday there's a new little girl either getting kidnapped, or raped n killed. This kills me.
Check out the flick "Miss Bala" the "happy ending" is still pretty dark
I don't even understand what you are saying.
Bleeding everywhere, NBD
sweet. I'll put a deposit down on the nicest hole in the wall we can afford :)
doing good just been busy getting moved to Cali so glad to be here now
I only want himm, nobody knows how.much he means to me!< 3
(Anonymous) Flexibility is the most requisite qualification for the management of great affairs.
you mean you wish you could ujabuja mental pictures! :)
Attending the conference in #Portland is a must! Follow him!
Did I really just Tweet that??? Whoa
Aw Good Morning !
you are adorable. that is all.
All gratitude for sending a galley copy of László Krasznahorkai's "Satantango." My tweeps are like so jeal of me right now.
This is gonna be a lot harder that I thought
President Obama has deported over 400,000 illegals, so why don't we have that many newly hired Ameri…
Just made my first ever formative assessment using Google Docs. Kids fill out a form; answers are sent to a spreadsheet.
I love your voice.
Promise me, that no matter how famous you get, you won't forget about your Mahomies.<3 We love youu.(;
Blueshirts Blank New Jersey Chris Kreider set up Dan Girardi's game-winning goal and added an important insurance goal himself Monday as
Only if you grew up on Boy Meets World...or watched the entire series again while in grad school.
You like to drink beer and i like to drink beer too
Hey boo let me get your number
“Just because you're paranoid doesn't mean they aren't after you” CATCH-22 Heller
Tiverton Land Trust to show film about light pollution
Wish I was smart
S/O anyone
Twitter doesn’t care if you like any of those things. Twitter cares if you're a
Anyone have any dramatic monologue for young women suggestions?
thats crazy. they say animals sense things. he probably has 2get used 2it.
I admit it. I like McDonald's cofee. Signed, still bullish on Starbucks.
ur a fool
I blame for that point a few days ago where we all simultaneously realized it hadn't actually been renewed yet. Ass.
I am 100% in favor of the USA quiting the UN...and kicking the Headquarters out of NYC! Send them to Brussels!
PerkinElmer Introduces Breakthrough AxION® Direct Sample Analysis TM (DSA) System for Mass Spectrometry Sample ...
If that, then what
Thank you Bowery Poetry Club. You are always so warm.
Sweet man
The Mat Gamel and Aoki commercial is great!
You're welcome...and I think you speak for most Orange Bloods: the bar is definitely back up to 10+.
Most welcome! Keep up the good work you are doing in Reno.
no way did you see the comeback win by the mariners against the blue jays
please stop rt'ing now :) pickingg!!
i wished for u to follow me:) <3 nd i will wish tht evryday until it comes true
I want to start a charity to protect endangered owls...solely so I can use the name, "The Give A Hoot Foundation".
Yeah probably.
This Chick got A Bird Man Star Over Her Belly Button
Loni, victim, also couldn't articulate abuses. She could only respond with yes or no to leading questions asked by prosecution.
are you about planning out your future or are you about living in the moment?
I cannot wait to live in my house at 112 South Broom Street
more money than 3rd rd pick though, and do they want 1 of 2 FA signings making more to be a 3rd QB?
Shout out to if your not following him FOLLOW HIM NOW. He's the realist person I know on twitter, and he's a rapper!
yup, its like a bad miami. Yhe other side of 6th rules.
So sorry meetings ran over and missed this; I know it must be a great group at one of my fav locations!
My new favorit Married couple is &nd !! Ilove themm, there should be a show abbout The wedding
survey says … definitely not. 85 from Southborough to Hopkington was pitch dark, save for dozens of little flashy reds & whites
RT : Make sure you're following
Watchin the Wilt Chamberlain special on
Someone just told me they like my big cheeks... Not a compliment.
ima be here fam I'm working on sum shit so I'm down 4 a minute
Happy Wednesday! " Don't Stop Believin , hold on to that feeling ...."
How do u take a screen shot on a #SIDEKIC4g plzzzzzz #smbdy tell me
Hope you got the Red Clay Arts brochure. D'ya???
Quote of the Day: “You miss 100 percent of the shots you never take.”
Love to Love You Baby!! Donna Summer... May you rest in paradise.
Has anyone seen a Drupal module that will allow you to verify fields in one content type against fields in another?
no they will not...i won't be surprised if both title matches are done by 9pm central time...punishment for being #ROH vets...
Looking for anyone with connections to bar owners/managers around Lambeau (Stadium View, The Bar, etc).
If he was already doing that, and we don't join, does that mean he'll stop?
PickUpLine: If you won't screw me, can I screw you?
That person is sick.
In 12 hours we have brunch starting!! $3 dollar mimosas will be flowin! Who is coming and who is putting that groupon to use?!?!
Billboard Awards 2012 ! I wanna go
YUM - that's a definite niche that needs to be filled - GREAT idea!!
"You know she's straight edge right?" / "Good, Im glad she shaves."
Go like We Are Defiance's Facebook page and if oh have a twitter, follow them at !
Congratulations to our friend Sami Ewers. She is the winner of two tickets to Saturday's Nike Hoop Summit at the Rose Garden.
definitely Man thanks
So I should retweet this? :)
Hug me like you mean it.
RT : LAREDO! Tonight, join at AGAVE AZUL... & at COSMOS
Madama Butterfly should not have gone to sleep.
Oh my gosh, too much. So great! Love it! Definitely why we hit it off. Btw, family is obsessed with !!
"With every new technological revolution, a political position is transformed" says , "Gaming, warfare, commerce all intersect"
follow back please. I'm new
. seriously, please get out of my stream. you're childishly pedantic. and boring. find another newt hater; there are many.
Seriously. I am so jealous of my sister's all-emoji conversations with other iPhone users :(
RT Happy birthday cause baby, you were #bornthisday =) Hope it's the best, sincerely- Millions of people
Hair Care Tip: Begin by combing your hair gently at the ends to get any tangles out and work your way up to the base of your hair
"house music was the blues of the nineties"
The Help.
I am car sick
Are you moving forward or standing still?
You should have let me cut your hair!
Remember all that winning I said I was doing in Vegas on Friday night? Well let's just say, I can't wait to leave this place.
Mom on panel at #pii2012 #piilabs says people just need to be aware of what they share & be smarter to use tech to their advantage
Had the best nap ever, watch me not sleep all night.
#saturdaylibrarian man i wish i was still in bed.
It is a HUGE compliment is for someone to trust you with their children and spread the word to their friends...#cheercoaching has
brush that shit straight off ya shoulder & look forward to destroying the next opponent!
Sadly, Gap only creates gaps. At my waist.
Pulling into bayhenn on the bus
you gotta be stroking me sir!!
PROUD OF YOU and your Team!! Thank you!
I really need to get out and about. Being at home all the time is getting tiring.
purple? Ok! :D mines light blue..but I like purple (i change mine alot)
Updating wife's ancient ass TomTom. When I have to select country settings, I arrogantly expect U.S.A. to be at the top of the list.
Irene Recovery Map: for ordinary people helping ordinary people: irenerecoverymap.com #Irene #CleanUp RT
Just a bit! Haha... still not totally comprehending this.. =P
happy b day baby
Both of my bitches bestfriends thats a 3 some when I attend
Thanks I am looking for an education administration position in independent schools...
what if god was one of us?
We welcome CenterLink: The Community of LGBT Centers to Milwaukee for their 5th Annual Exec & Board Leadership Summit. Welcome colleagues!
May 25. Ace Bar In Chicago. I'll be playing with and i hope my #chicago pals can make it, love.
have to pee when I am laying down?
Bella liked the sketchers ad best, her cousins were stars
came across someone that knew ya today.. Awesome. Hello back at ya.
Happy Birthday to Me, Happy Birthday to Me!!
Taking circumstances prisoner. :-)
Gettin ready for this weekend! Get your tickets online soon!
Can they just crown the winner already so I can buy an album of his?
Putting "sad" in front of "goth" is mad redundant.
Tip #68: Get max value by having a thorough understanding of personalities. The majority of poker players have a HUGE ego.
I want to go away.
yes  perfect, my plans are canceled. id rather sit around and watch you! Love ya ari xoxo 
Aah, late to #libchat. I'm Christina, high school librarian in the Mitten (MI).
The worst part about job hunting is when you get the "We loved you but..." emails/calls :-(
Thank God somebody said something! Can't take the play by play commentary!
Oh my let us get the test before I forget everything
Just now watching results from idol. I must say America and Jimmy got it right this week! Time for DAandre' to go.
do a handstand and eat something
lol hate on then!
lucky monster.
Thanks for the plug!
try ironman yurbuds. Never fall out, even while running
Maxin out. N gettin my 6 week workout plan
Hell Yes Ben Francisco!
Delaware All Della Donne!!
Lol l I just noticed.
Going thru the TL and I'm sick about D-Rose and ROTL at all the tweets about how "good" NY v Miami is gonna be
hey twitter and :)
If considering meds, it might be time to consult sleep medicine doctor who can help you figure out IF you really need them
happy mothers day mom, I wanna make you proud. <3
#FF these awesome people! Once I win the lottery, they will be notified ASAP!
it's always easier said than done
I'm a bit worried to return home to our 1840s rowhouse. It couldn't stand this wknd's rain, not sure about an earthquake!
Why would you buy fresh fish and then hop on the train?!
and the decision to refrain from making a decision.. Loving the Tillich
Imani: goin hard as a mothafucka me: is that a thing? Imani: yeah, but i'm using it ironically
Shit. The whole half priced fraps at #Starbucks is over. Waaah!
If you can't even name 3 songs off someone's mixtape, you are not eligible to tweet constantly about them. Stop.
I'm doing fantastic, What about you?!?
O.... very nice Trek! Love white bikes! planning on any big rides this year? Tour de Cure, pelotonia, that kinda thing?
Our song isn't "Ziti Tonight"
I put nothing pass nobody
I hate getting sleepy for no reason -_-
Happy Mother's Day to all the moms, and to anyone who acts in a motherly capacity to anyone else.
HEADSHOT SPECIALS for May-June. Book now Los Angeles. Contact for any questions!!!
no el de one time
I am talking about the past, they may win tonight, and I will gladly eat my words, but seen them lose this kind of game way too much
looked up the penal codes for NY, and its a class A Misdemeanor, which means little to no jail time - just processing.
Seems like we should just form a hashtag #gorogue for all the #pubmedia innovators.
AP: President Barack Obama to visit Master Lock in Milwaukee on Wednesday.
LOVED your "Voices of Lombard Street" exhibit! Baltimore, if you haven't been, this is definitely one to check out!
Quick .. What is your dog thinking? Sorry. Bad joke. I believe you communicate. Looking forward to communicating with you.
dreams as if you'll live forever, live as if you'll die today.
things were looking good two weeks ago. Now were back in reverse. A sad reality is starting to sink in.
We're very fortunate! RT That is awesome, I didn't realize that was working with
Garcetti 4 Mayor volunteers meeting at 10AM, 3/31 at Taix, 1911 W. Sunset, Echo Park. Get download on campaign. Bring your great ideas!
New curator
What comes first- the branding or the business?
Report: Leeds, England soccer fans upset at Minnesota Twins fans for stealing ... - Yahoo! Sports (blog)
Bless Fam....Linkup! DM me your email please.
I like it 2 post 2 Fbook, twitter & flickr all at once,but then again each time I do that I question what I am doing with my life
What grade and subject do you teach?
hi flo, it's x6kool -- is there a way I can message you?
lol that'd probly be alot cheaper than flying anyway
For those of you who have sent messages, thank you! If I have not gotten back to you it's because twitter is giving me an error msg.
If someone doesn’t follow your 1st instruction, don’t give that person a second instruction.
Can't tell me nothing!!
My heart, love, and prayers go out to the people of the midwest tonight.
Well done, Oirish~
Looking forward to tomorrows class. Let's get it everyone!!
“: FWP will be holding wolf open house meetings throughout state. Are the wolves expected to attend?
how was the documentary
what app business is this?
Not easy...move to a different town?
Is this your book?
I take fictional characters seriously up to a point, but there's definitely a line some people cross.
How do April showers make you feel? -PT
Expect Great!
Man... I need a Grande White Mocha..
Now I'm kinda excited about the commencement ceremony this Sunday.
RT : Thanks and glad I could help out. I plan on attending the show in Broken Arrow OK also, so look for tweets
None whatsoever.
haha nothing wrong with that (;
greetings! thanks for the follow :) happy weekend!
I love how I have a bracelet. Then it's on his wrist everyday<3
does that 21st century- contrast the itinerant nature of the preacher with the management ideal of deep connection?
Why did she call you a dumbfuck?
Special thanks for the follows: , , and Have a great start to your week!
I hate heels... I don't care if they make my legs look good... they give my feet too much pain ~>_<~
I'm in a #freakymood lol
can u please follow me, it would make this mahomie's dream come true :)
I smoke Shrek y'all
Carless for who knows how long. 😔
RT Every person is an example for someone else; only a few are examples for all.
no we are not
when you played at extreme thing, a trophy fathers trophy son it reminded me ofmy fam. Thanks you for you talent<3
Oh dear. A terrible sleeping pattern is developing.
40% of Americans can't remember what they bought others for Christmas one year later.
One of my favorite Dave songs is a brand of wine and uses a green/sustainable process!? This just made my night - cheers!
they're the same person. You heard it here first
He bats 3rd, Boss...always has. RT : when you bat Mauer 2nd that means he's paid for his "BB's" not RBI.
OH: when you are sleeping later, I am going to... interrupted by other person: Don't pee in my mouth! No, I was just going to cut your hair.
Got a new gretsch drum kit coming in, selling an Pearl Export kit for cheap with hardware, kick pedal, hi hat stand, and 2 cymbal stands.
The wise are known for their understanding, and pleasant words are persuasive. Proverbs 16:21
if you can still say that Sunday night I might be impressed
I think it's AWESOME. I love the song<3 (:
He's been around for about a decade now. Not been very good, but he's been around.
Finished proving my ninja skills to the marching band
disposition = pointless
you're both hipsters. and you're both wolves. so am i. (happy first friday with no wolves). it's painful.
I suspect if we followed the diet from about 1000AD we'd probably be quite skinny
Just learned I have an ancestor named George 'Big Nose' Parrott. Please google him now!
They are buck naked on the porch. I will pay you AND feed you dinner of you come over.
I sing Betta when I rap
Ok I see the Pacers hooping
What is the worst victory lane liquid to get all over you: Soda, Sports Drink or Beer?
Today's #Tech Tip: Include video in your email newsletter. Videos always receive a lot of click throughs.
it is???... it not raining over at my house....mann thats crazy
awesome thanks for coming.
my daughter among the science fair winners! “: Lots of excitement + #summer #internship opportunities at #DC #STEM fair today”
only if everyone knew wht we be tlking about...erryone be like they fcking cray.
im still young, i have lots of time to fall in love. right now isnt the time.
It's great to be in touch about your work!
: no SF novel or movie could have made an event like this happen. Design fiction made it happen.
Body by is the best workout ever!!! Love, Love, Love it!!!
Ok now ladies
Only thing so far is the grammer. the rest makes no sense. But my mistake was throwing it out there too fast, wasnt ready
one too many lol!!!
can we still get a pregnancy pool going for your sister?
KELLY dis a great job!!!
Ion owe nobody shit, I just wanted to see em shine
Hav a nice night :)))
Yo Roc... who you tryin to battle after Rich? The whole Dot Mobb in the Top 10 bruh so you gotta go after the other seven. Yup.
All the sexy are at the gym at the Same time omg my heart!
Totally forgot I had as my alarm for Saturdays
Free wifi at train stations: This commuting grad student's life-saver many times over. Thank u !
June 20 is West Virginia Day which celebrates the creation of the state!
Exhausted from a few long, but great days!
2007 was the last time... Lakers have won a few since then :-)
Gotta figure out a good way to tell some1 on Facebook that her commenting to every status update and every photo is hella annoying.
The one thing about the #Heat we learn from our mistakes #noexcuses time for payback
I have a Comedy Improv show tomorrow at Playhouse West in Noho. 8pm, $0. Would love to see you there! :)
where are you now?
My Jedi senses are telling me that you're... horny...
When are you announcing your #midwest shows?
wanna kill hitler together? (; must be Jason....
Cant wait till ABDC comes out today gonna be sick , watching the re-runs missing ICONic Boyz
Followed them all. Perhaps my bio misleads...I like too much
thank you ;))) hope you check out my youtube channel and subscribe!!!! working on an original album
A Happy Thursday along with Mac Duggal love to our new friends!
It's bigger than an omelet. And a bread box.
MCVE protect profits dont be greedy
Hey Mermaids fans you should check out my book trailers on youtube.. just go to youtube and put Erin Sankey you'll see both
I don't know if I need to learn flash too. Or if I can make animations completely in AE.
um of course!
Dave drove a Ford.....Twinkie?
Where do I send photos in?
Iranian Alliance Against Borders International Conference on the Iranian Diaspora October 13-14, 2012 (UCLA). via Narges Bajoghli
Also, here's hoping this Vegemite acts as a stimulant to wake me up cause this coffee is not doing it.
RT : RT : We are approaching the end of the document -- were making packages of ideas now.
I need somebody to talk to
There are 3 ingredients in the good life: learning, earning and yearning.
One more. Go!
...All in one session ..hilarious!! Lol
She sounds like a keeper!
Escape! Go to a coffeeshop or somesuch place to reinvigorate the work effort. Always works for me when inspiration runs dry
Remember to breathe during those tough conversations. You can do it!
“: Studies have found that fatherhood suppresses testosterone.” This is not surprising...
Good job Vandy. Maybe good for Cats to taste defeat before the Big Dance
Trying Bikram yoga for the first time. Read about how my out-of-shape self melted into a puddle of butter and PBR later on
congrats Jim! Good luck in your race!
just tell the haters to go away and rethink their lives
When a person is down in the world, an ounce of help is better than a pound of preaching.
You could always start using proper nouns i.e. "Mt. Rushmore #FF...". Wouldn't be awkward at all.
HI , see you ladies on Saturday #BabyBashBling. Tix will also be sold at the door!
Trouble printing #calicon11 agenda on #Firefox - Had to use IE - #whatupwiththat CALI?
heifer! Why u leaving on Sunday, Monday is a holiday! U can't leave until late Sun or Monday. We need time w/U.
I think I will just stop listening to all music after the 90's. Everything else is just junk for the most part.
Great day to all and HAPPY THONG THURSDAY ladies! - De La Cruz Music
Turning STEM into STEAM, Nice to hear I am not alone in this thought.
Thanks for the follow! We hope to see you at this year's #DiplomaticBall. We'll be sending you the Save the Date on Friday.
"Where the Mountain Meets the Moon." I gave her a TON more dragon books today.
We R N the studio shooting a teeny tiny 3 wk old baby named Dominic. Fotos 2 follow soon!
where you tryin to go?
"Your like a bitbull in a cat pound" Watching Lizard Lick Towing with my long lost friend Maegan! :) Great Spring break so far :)
“ you can't help yourself when you're in love with somebody.”
I'm guessing their safe??? Im away in Canada and rarely am able to steal the TV away from my uncle. I rely on you haha
“ headphones r
We will LIVE!! Happy 2nd Birthday, Potter's House of Denver. Maybe my DH will do a special w/some of his infamous greens!
dont think just follow RT for that good ol' follow
takes top 12 losing to twice :/
gotta love Manny's. Omg so good.
me too.
The total gym radio commercial is encouraging me to dial and drive for a 5 minute special offer.
vending on Brady street, seems natural! outside of club Brady
Big ass horse toothed bitch.
yes, pompous is the word for iphone & ipad commercials. disappointed.
The majority of companies are not operating at their optimimum performance. Economic modeling can help
Before you quit, try. — Ernest Hemingway
What I'm looking forward to in Ducks/Missouri State mismatch: Seeing lots of Bryan Bennett after Ducks roll out to inevitable huge lead.
We can't ALL move to P'town and flip pizza. A federal matter, indeed!
Why does Facebook even give me the option to "like" my status? Of course I like my status, I'm fucking hilarious. And sexy.
Destinations matter, theme for dell's unconferenve
come to IU and rage sometime! :)
She needs them! She's so excited!!! She's so... scared!
Married to the game, but she broke our vows.
has recorded at least 1 ast in 99.7% of his career reg. season gms (675-677). This puts him just ahead of Larry Bird among non Gs
I don't care who you are, I don't care if we've argued before, or even if we've never spoken before. I love you. Happy New Year everyone
lol! That's so awesome.
it is a great restaurant!
Casey Anthony not guilty on murder charges..
I slather sunscreen on and I still get burned! #notfair or
Call the foul. Do not wait for the basket to go in.
Welcome to Twitter mate! Glad to see you made it on board.
Who got VOXER?
Senate defeats Sen. Ortman's amendment that would've removed Internet sales tax from #Vikes bill.
"I am just a worthless liar, I am just a imbecile. I will only complicate you." From the song, "Sober" by TOOL.
fuckkkkkkkkkkk i have a presentation tomarrow and i m not prepared .-. fawk
Brian Cardinal referees mavs games too?
Hate when stefon falls asleep and I'm full of energy
Seattle superintendent - The Seattle Times
don't be jelly
The awkward moment of being in love with someone & they belong to someone else
Not even tired what so ever
Everybody for self these days.
I know what u mean, my PS3 went out the day i bought NCAA 2010... I think its a conspiracy
Really?! RT : Fact of the day: Alice Cooper once poured beer into Bruce Springsteen's boots when he wasn't looking.
Go outside and look at the sky right now
Come home from work go straight to your room
awesome meeting of the Reno Makerspace folks. Great group.
Can you all show some love today? Their goal is to provide a vest for every Police K9 in WI
Olympic snatch training. Hang snatches. Then bench press & weighted pull ups. Then Warrior workout. Then Muay Thai. Then !
i feel bad for that kid. what's he goina get teased about more? the balloon thing or the fact that his dad was on a show called "wife swap?"
I did too!
All Referees are "Sissy Girls" compared to Ed "The Hulk" Hochuli!
me too. i have a question for u.
Goodmorning MIAMI & LATIN AMERICA last nignt was superperb everybody was chatting til late hopefully we can continue this pattern LETS CHAT
Just had chicken liver mousse with schmultz at #sepia....outstanding.! schmultz is carmelized chicken fatI'm told but delicious will suffice
Stalker much ??? Haha(;
follow me on twitter for up to date information about the March on Thursday
You are a child of God. Your playing small does not serve the world. There is nothing enlightened about shrinking. ~Marianne Williamson
let's play ball! Ready for first pitch
RT : Nine #Brewers games at Miller Park in nine days! How many games will you attend?! I'll be at all nine.
Not enough is known about prescription drug use in pregnancy, say experts
watching the voice for biebssssssssssss
Never assume som1 has common sense...u mite be givin them waay 2 much credit
"The New Santa Clause..."
aww, my song. love you buddy!
What u get her
Umm...twitter is telling me to follow phil neville. what did i ever do to twitter???
Bummer. I've been away working. Did not know about this. So sad for an area with such promise.
cause they want karaoke and you not there
Ever wonder what librarians in non-trad. roles think about? Join me @ 11 in the exhibits area for "thriving in the knowledge economy"
Tweet at #BostonOnTheRun!!
As much as people bash Levels by for being overrated... It's sucks a god damn feel good song. Can turn any shitty mood around.
no I meant from laughter xD! Lmao I say "I'm gonna pee" or "peeing" whenever something is really funny
wait buck?
hello & Happy New Year!
C'mon #Indiana get this thing done!
rapid acquisition of skills will be needed through apprenticeships and coaching. Boettcher
Now that I have 1000 followers, I am going to change my icon!
Happy commodification of love day. Everyone is deserving of love...even you.
ha right some grilled Duck
I follow back <3
it was great seeing you this weekend!
glad drama is taking over batavia
Unbelievable finish. Patriots are coming to Indy. Not what Colts fans wanted to see.
Put a Grammy in that Jacket!!! Congrats on the nomination. I've been listening to you guys for years.
Last class is donedonedone! Now for all the grading...
AMEN!!! ~> RT Dear #Lakers, you can keep your dirty players and dirty refs. We have our #Thunder!
I'm watching 30 Rock. Very Funny show
#oakland #thunder !!! <3
Exchange 20 Slurpee Nation points for a ’s Champions Online Gold Membership for a month. After that you turn back into a pumpkin.
2nd league Cowboys, Eagles, Bengals, Jets, Chargers, 49ers, Falcons, and Lions.
ONE-LINER: Alcohol is not the answer, it just makes you forget the question.
can't wait till your summer tour!!! AH. It's going to be awesome to see y'all again!! :)
Please talk me into GOING to the gym.
How come no mention of Philbin not being there all week?
Everyone is tweeting sad things about leaving IU and all I want is some super man ice cream. Something isn't adding up. I'm bored.
Oh, now I'm starting to see a link.
lets all laugh at cardiff la la la la
sent you a DM!
Still don't panic, but we're having some trouble coming back online after our server upgrade. We're working on it!
We used to enjoy "Pizza Thursday". We now enjoy "Pizza Wednesday". Maybe the work week will go quicker that way???
Tom Brady should be MVP ! Brees and Rodgers have a better team.
People like
Staring at a PDF that I am supposed to print, fill out and fax back. Isn't there a better way?
You can go for a walk at this hour in tosa, and be perfectly safe. Meanwhile, on the east side...
plz follow me or
you are one lucky person!
Getting evacuated from space mountain. Bucket list made.
did u try our food today? don't you know you are missing something for real ?
a must win at all costs! Welbeck must start, adds tremendous energy and been in great form off late!
I spent many a New Year's Eve in his company! "RIP Dick Clark. For so many of us, you set standard for music, radio & business."
Got it. Love it so far.
“: I'm going to a party at Ray Jay's house. For serious.” make a sex tape with him.
Using to organize our apartment search in Portland. Gonna make it so much easier!
32768 meeting invitations. iCalendar, what's up?
Weird people:)
f... Amy Winehouse 92 people were killed yesterday at a summer camp in Norway mostly kids
We hope to see everyone tonight at , but if you can't make it, please let us know! contact [at] refresh-dc [dot] org. Thanks!
RT I've been inspired. Let's not stop with #GOBLUE at Michigan Stadium. #PRESIDENTS on Mt Rushmore. #GEOLOGY on Grand Canyon.
Giving away tickets to Chili Cook-Off within 24 hours - Chance to see artist
My 15 year old daughter went to the circus tonight w/her older sister. She came back needing a grin-ectomy. Who would have thunk?
join a league then?
RT : Had a great turn out at my quarterly "Who's Who" networking party... Check out my facebook page for pics
Ariana Runs the World :)
I have nothing done today ! In quebec its 14:13 :0
oh well that's good. :) where do you live?
There was the BABY RUTH and the REGGIE BAR,what's next.....PUJOLSEYS CHOCOLATE BAR!!
RT if your house has the worst internet in the world.
Congrats! RT : LP recognized by ALM's Marketing the Law Firm as #1 in its Magnificent 25 for achievements in mktg & biz dev.
where can I get all of your cookies?
Obama: "We need a tax code where everyone pays their fair share." Does that include Amazon?
u guys goin to that banquet?
Please Follow Back Thats My All Time Wish Other Than Meeting You Of Coures!(: #NeverSayNever xoxo
RT : Reading great article on wonderful Steve from I don't quite get the Bill Clinton comparison, though......
This non-bull run water is hard. It's leaving stains on my dishes.
Harmony Hammond: the "don't ask, don't tell" policy of museums is a form of censorship.
cause thats stupid
Lmao "popular fuck nigga" RT : being a real gangsta is old but being a popular fuck nigga is cool only n
i tried a Cliff bar today. Now seeking something to get this awful chemical taste out of my mouth.
Thanks for a great season Mason, we are lucky to have you!
ya boy rose is a choker smh melody finish him fatality
big n toasty was awesome
April showers bring Mike Blowers.
I am a terrible big sister..I need to do better
Your day gig isn't Getty Images by chance? If so, will run into you in the office... :P
We are not integrated with any referral platforms today, sorry!
Happy you meet them and stuff. Its just a chair dance like C'mon dont make a big deal about
I need more followers please follow me please I will follow uu if u follow me
Ricky Rubio mania continues with a morning stop at General Mills! Exciting event
We all some mutts
A bunch of people are talking about this. All I know is someone needs some hope so
so SO love your photo!!
BOYFRIEND is AMAZING!! #Swagg ...you make us #Belieber 's PROUD :) RT!
It's called air..Turn it on please😏
It was the most disgusting thing to pop into my head in a long time. Sorry for sharing!
RT : Very Very Special Tweet of the day goes out to for sponsoring Milwaukee's first every #ypweek. Thanks for...
No meetings tomorrow, so I'm working from the downtown office.... Owwwwww!
yo man is sick
More Blink 182 tickets tomorrow on The Zone and all week long.
aw yeah!
thx to u!
Too many DUMB TOs by the
Im so playa im so playa im so playa im so playa..
Mitch's Hot Dogs are $1 until 7 PM!
i guessed that first
Bye, bye, Mr. Pizza Guy #HermanCain wapo.st/usT8hh
Booing Mullan was cathartic today.
Thanks for the retweet!
Happy Monday Huskies! Enjoy the Beautiful Weather!
Then the thing tht kills me is people dont care! But wen they feel some type of way im supposed to care! FUCK THT !
THIS THURSDAY! We're doing an event with POPSCENE. Does that make us a Pop-cycle?
HEY! if anyone wants to box up a little bit of "NORMAL" & send it to me! or leave it on my doorstep! AS SOON AS POSSIBLE! THAT'D BE GREAT!!!
Reminiscing on the past
Among many reasons I quit the academia 'ladder'--fixation on who is 'right' rather than what works.
yeeehawww for martial arts!!! congratulations. you will never regret the work. xxoo, kk
Our offices re-open tomorrow morning after holiday break. Looking forward to getting back into the swing of things!
i have!!
Alright, Drogba... just get off the field.
girl your always on my mind
is da best boxer. Point blank period
ah yeah that would certainly help lol
good morning baby where u been at :(
.. 90% of the time it works everytime.
your welcome dear :o)
"Your children will weep over your exploded body."
This day was worst than I thought:(
Thanks and same to you, hope all is well
RT : Gr8 presentation by guest speaker! // Larry is a great speaker.
Use the code BAFRIDAY for 15% on Black Friday on our entire store!
Happy beautiful day :)
Sorry guys no more shoutouts. Gonna reach my tweeting my limit sorry.
I hate being sunburt! It sucks!
I did the same thing. Did college after. Then majored in English like a genius.
You can sign-up for recurring tax payments when you make a credit or debit card IRS Installment Agreement payment at www.payUSAtax.com.
Happy New Year... Now it's time to rock & roll
For some reason I sleep better when my mommy is home
ugh, I shall have to Spank twitter for not informing me of your reply. Let me check it out.
« ill give OKC their props but #LAKERNATION ALL DAY GET IT GOT GOOD =)» HHHAAA!! Yeah fuckin right #TeamOKC !!
We are marching to a destiny that we don't know exists - but the light that we follow says it does - so we go. Soldiers, stay focused.
Tonight: Singers / rappers - Perform 2 of your best songs! Karma Lounge, 51 First Avenue (corner of 3rd St - NYC). 21+, 10pm, $10 Admission.
Sophia bout to beat my ass. I should make sure I got enough money Lls
We only have 4, $50 off coupons for Botox, plus if you sign up with Brilliant Distinctions, you can get another $25-$50 off that day!
he cooks?! Why hasn't he cooked here?!? Darn it Kurt!!
I love you too girl!! :) Glad I gotta a chance to meet him! :)
Gave all the women in #Arguelles flowers and been showering my darling with gifts all day. Is that big enough? I think so. ;-)
Sun is out, lots of vendors here At my post www.tinygreens.org Come by 4 some WG!!
Great campfire & camp food @ Krausse Springs w son Ben
Support Local #Artists this #Holiday Season /Dec-3, 6-10 pm Dec-4, 12-6 pm at 319 W 46th St. • Corner of 46th & Grand Erik Brown Homes
I learned to my astonishment that Realtor(R) is not only supposed to be capitalized, but supposed be followed by a circle-R.
Glad to meet and his family / chatting it up a bit last week at Orlando airport. Colin, you da man. Look forward to the book.
Bensimon: Too often we focus on what students lack. We'd end up w/ better outcomes if we focused on the organizat'l culture of
Girl! You get serious POINTS (and props) for that, LOL! :)
There was. It went well, as I understand (/cc )
Finally the herb come around!!!! Happy 420
Publish a book? Like a picture book?!
I'm moving into my great grandparents house. Mom sold our house the other day):
ill tell you later :)
the good spot is at 105 riv tonight. with dj moma, dj stimulus, and guest dj frank delour.
I suffer from this too in my room 😔 lol .. Haven't found a solution yet.
Thank you Jennifer :-)
Working hard tonight! BLOG in progress... STK NYC fans look out!!!
XDDDDD check your phone!
Double booked... have to reluctantly give up my ticket to the event tonight: DM me if can use it!
After all that, I still got my A boarding pass :)
..no messages on my phone.. now my mind wondering..
loll I don't know whose they were but they were in my car
Time for to start giving the headlines. He's just adding on to the greatest season by an American soccer player EVER
Need some new music to download. Open to suggestions.
Creeps me our when I kill a spider and one of its legs still move :s
#edtech We are piloting iPads for the first time. Looking for teacher must have apps for K-5; aligning with Common Core a plus.
been one of them days... I need a hug.
knowing that you'll never like me again, and i shouldnt like you = </3
new location in door county! BLISS 724 JEFFERSON ST STURGEON BAY WI 54235
Good morning twitterverse... after a weekend of hardcore procrastination I'm surprised I got up for work on time!
#ifonlyuknew professor..that NONE of us actually want to become accountants
What is your favorite Shorty's meal? Brisket, ribs, pulled pork?
hahaha good job (:
Their entire body language has changed. Not the same team at all.
Baby it's cold outside. C'mon in and warm up with a burger.
When a fellow says it ain't the money but the principle of the thing, it's the money. -Artemus Ward
how do you submit your business for your living your dream segment?
Lookin into Skate Life Northwest goin on this Weekend at the Dept of Skateboarding. Anyone Goin?
#happybirthdaytravisclark You are so lucky!
“: Merch Mart! We're parked on Orleans at Hubbard”
Does anyone else feel extremely accomplished if you can pee and manage to only use one sheet of toilet paper?
New study states that more and more black men are marrying women of other races. New York Times report.
Live tonight we're are Music Millenniumm..with the Rolling Tones...that's right the Rolling Tones. Watch and you'll see.
easy. They knew the idiots that blindly buy every Apple product would need replacements every 3-6 months.
Tweet Tweet.
you're as awesome as a rockstar . (:
Follow the band and put us in your #FF :)
How many of you have never told anyone that you are able to see and hear otherworld beings, such as ghost spirits, ET's, fairies, etc.?
Hope You are feeling better Devin! How's everything going in California? GOD BLESS. :)
This our year to win the super bowl lets start working as a team. In the pass if you worked together you win super bowls.
Of course. But if I wrote the resume, I'd suspect job search strategy was the problem ;-)
My car literally sounds like a whale when I turn corners.
Gah. I should NOT be this good at the Rock Band keyboard already.
#FridayProblems that's how fat peeps role
Thanks for following! :-)
might want to inform the station personel? They are no help at all
That really depends on the individual and whether they have a digital will
Remarks By President Obama At Cinco De Mayo Reception - eNews Park Forest
can it be one morning i dont have to wake up with some non-sense so sick and tired
C'mon Ian!
I'm afraid the smell will knock me out and I'll be passed out in the entranceway, with cool people stepping all over me.
no reason you shouldn't. First 30 pills have a money back guarantee. Plus enter ROGAN @ checkout for 10% off.
That's great you shave your armpit, but what about your mustache! LMAO.
I am keeping an eye on it, Ahmed. Hope you are well. Best to all my friends.
Highly productive rehearsal with lots of script and character analysis. These actors are ready to go!!!
Whoa, Lafayette left for America in 1776 without telling his wife. And she was pregnant!
The pure desires of my Heart are what I am here to claim!
I wrote your name in my heart, and forever it will stay
Arrived at JFK. Now: time to find a corner in T5 to take a nap before heading to the city. Didn't sleep a bit on that red eye.
Oops, you're right. LitFest Pasadena has been postponed until May, per their website -- earlier communication said it was still on.
So we about to go into half time and the lions ain't got nothing but 3 points ha ha ha ha ha ha lmao
Thank you for sharing it, Cher. Morning :-)
Parents wont let me drive the mustang today. :(
Chicago for memorial day weekend is now official. 😊
Remember, kid. Heroes get remembered, but legends never die. Follow your heart, kid, and you'll never go wrong.
reaaawwrr! one of those hot yoga men in the flesh!
try putting her in car seat on dryer
Avengers was alright... Kinda long. The 3D was cool though.
also, not sure how this will work: "Readers who come...thru links...will be able to read... even if they...reached their...limit"
The biggest risk is not taking the risks.
Some people are just true scumbags
you're WELCOME!!!
oh fun
Seriously so sick right now
REMEMBER!! As far as anyone knows we are a nice, normal family!
I NEED MONEY
#Overheard at the Cottage: A first grader, to a staff member: Do you live here like President Lincoln?
how is all the twitter people tonight????
Amazing feat!!! I'm right behind ya - can dead lift a good 30 lbs. :)
Great THANKS to & for a fantastic film session today. The Alliance is blessed by their genius.
Thanks for coming out and joining us for Cinco de Mayo!
Goin hard da whole night, cus I aint goin back to my old life! I promise
Don't think bout it, be bout it
(Checks "All of the above.")
Countdown to Happy Hour: 18 minutes. Stop by from 5-8PM to wind down after the work day! The perfect mid-week reprieve.
I bet they do :/
Have always, always, always wondered why more people don't talk about Westberg. Unless he's said he's not interested anymore...
Thinks its funny when big wigs make important decisions concerning the little people w/out consultation & makes things worse for everyone.
totally agree with you...so sad. is taking donations to help the animals that survived.
The office across the hall is jamming out to classic rock. It's a good afternoon at work :-)
Wow Miami.. 3 straight losses?
That sounds cool! :)
i thought u were goin to bed and did u see my he on my mind post lol
i was reading your post about adding rich Snippets to big commerce For some reason it is displaying at the bottom of my page
Systems Administrator for contract to hire! $500 referral bonus available, let me know if you nkow of anyone interested
Don't have any energy! Feel like I'm gone pass out! 😞
Great reading last night! Thanks to everyone who came out & most esp. to our readers James Brown, Stacy Gnall, Patrick O'Neil & Wynne Renz.
I'm glad this misstatement was made. Between now and election time, people must have an intelligent understanding of the situation. [1944]
I am aware of their suckage
Music is an art form that is now timeless. It is as much the art the day it was written as the day you listen to it!
Helluva PPV.got every match right except H vs Undertaker and team Johnny vs team Teddy
you mean a future wife of jacoby!
Not a lot of Ramon high-5's going around today.
#rbms2009 Jost posted on Facebook: Notice about current scholarships for 2009 Preconference. More soon on various lists.
#ObamaBookTitles How to Wee-Wee Up A Nation
I'm just gonna go to sleep now..
he must be sober!!! Wait until he's been drinking then he should make perfect sense
Last movies seen: Like Crazy (2011), The Artist (2011)
feel better!
Yes...hilarious!
I hope a spider doesn't crawl on my latptop tonight. /Shudders. ><
Frantically researching WA Segway & Moped rentals. Fuel NP
NEH offers Queensborough CC a $500K challenge grant to support Kupferberg Holocaust Resource Center and Archives.
ahh I always feel great knowing I did 3 mi before 7am.
this day now quickly ends I pray, my words today did not offend God, my Father, please give me sweet rest So in the morning I can do my best
New Follower#
Wow. Bet that doesn't hurt too much right now.
that's how I roll!
I like going out, but I LOVE being by myself listening to music a bit more.
U know what I don't understand, I strongly dislike 1D, but I love the song "what makes you beautiful"... How is that possible..?
whatever liar! :D
awesome. Well, good luck and good night!
my hair looks fucked up 😒
WHEN I FEEL LIKE IT!
Apparently it's snowing at McCann Birmingham. Kinda wish it were snowing here now.
I can't get the app to work.
I haven't received an invitation by mail in years. F U Facebook!
why not?
I listened to some grime. Sounded just like dubstep to me.
HE KEEPS SAYING MY NAME. HE SAID HE WAS GONNA FOLLOW ME. HE DIDNT THOUGHH LE CREY JSADHGFKDJLAGHLKFSDJHGLKFDJ
oh boy. Wait til sees this!!!! Hahhahahahhahahaha
Finally a vacation! 9 days to do whatever I want. First thing, time to start up the grill! :)
HAVE YOU GUYS MADE IT TO MIAMA YET
hahaha that'd be funny ^_^
I think needs to hire you for the job. Obviously their other choices aren't working out, since they advertise often.
SUPER DUPER BOOORRRRREEEDDD!
Playing with the new iPad. Beyond the great retina display I've been impressed w/ accuracy of touch screen, less so with WiFi connectivity.
When Ozzie gets suspended for saying something stupid, and multiple players don't get suspended for DUIs, the former isn't the problem.
Florida tomorrow(: Excited.
Congratulations on the new car!
YES exactly, I wasn't weighted down by comparing it to anything so had the ability to just enjoy it.
lol. I'm jealous of you BTW we still gotta eat Mexican!
check out our EP for free at www.whalersmusic.bandcamp.com RT if you like what you hear!
Im not ur girl so dont worry bout me! Damn... Hop the fuck off!
TOPO! Weekend Explorer 3D Outdoor Recreation Mapping Software ...
yeah..it sucks but three more years and i don't have to deal with her anymore(:
Now leaving Cliff Hagagn to head over to Commonwealth for the Blue/White game. Ready to see what's in store for UK football this season.
White Sox choke again. Jake Peavy did not deserve to lose this game 1-0. This lack of hitting is unacceptable for major leaguers.
lol...and.i thought I was deranged!!!
#MUSICNEWS Sony-led group wins EU approval to buy EMI publishing
i this the one who also dumpster dives regularly?
I was gonna go out at midnight and shop on black Friday..... But the godfather marathon is on... Lol # don't wanna deal with people
This tweet is all about how I haven't had time to tweet. Happy Spring, y'all!
This day 1860: Ma and Pa Ingalls, parents of "Little House" author Laura Ingalls Wilder, were married in Concord, Wisconsin.
I like Swift and Selena, too! Follow back?
Damn my mood change quick smh
i think should text me.
I know right... I'm ready!
Brides of Beverly Hills has ridiculously awful production values. It's BH, for Pete's sake; why does it look so jank?
Italian! But that was funny! Lol!
The lovely S&S cast... TudyMunteanu, XavierSagel
my mum thinks you're pretty (;
Seriously, Bad Boys 2 is such a better movie.
No intelligent idea can gain general acceptance unless some stupidity is mixed in with it.--Fernando Pessoa
My heart stops bass drops.
Power is gone on my MacBook and I forgot my adapter...
bc of vilma they probably gave lofton more than they should have.
I'm also tired of this third shift bs.
Back at it again, going to be a late night!
thank you for following me, I followed you back
i probably shouldn't get the weather report from the background on my gmail. i suddenly realized that its "been raining" for the last 3 days
RT "LATE BREAKING: UMC officials confirm Rep. Giffords is in surgery. She has not been declared dead. **Please RT**
Was in the same boat so I kicked it to overdrive this week. Most productive I've been all year and now I can enjoy my weekend!
Gonna go to the bar, probably the mutiny, and draw up some tattoos. Anyone want to join me?
follow nyjer morgan, the realt-plush, funny dude!!
We found Waldo in a hopeless place.
Wait till yall hear YGeeDot beat jack Another Round!
come wax my face
thank you!! Amber did a FABULOUS job!
One less Kardashian show on the air! The Kloe and Lamar show is going bye-bye...
i'm too big of a douchebag for a blameless twitter audience to get the full assault, i suspect
Come check out Denver Williams' music show and zine event tonight! Right now, even! Sweet tunes!
I thought I was the only one... you getting that voice back?
Old characters on GH: Anna, Robert, Holly. Like I'm a kid again. Where's Frisco? Oh yeah, he'll be on Dancing With the Stars.
ev balls hard in the nhl realm
NO! You did? At TJs? Insane! I didn't think he ventured into such non-Kosher places. I would have done the same thing.
RT : A great artist is always before his time or behind it. "Gorge Edward Moore.
Why oh why would Apple make a TV set?
"If everyone in the room you're in currently were forced to compete in The Hunger Games right now, would you survive?" Me and my cat? Nope.
Seattle's arterial streets are passable, so delivery trucks out to do their rounds, but the neighborhood streets are worse than ever.
Read on Amazon: "These are GREAT for beginner glovers or people that just want lights on their hands for events."
|++_|| WANT TO CELEBRATE YOUR BIRTHDAY SATURDAY AT CLUB MATRIX...TEXT ME 972 839 4921.--> WWW.G1PARTY.COM
That is *fantastic!* Show to , maybe?
yay!! I'll start saving my pennies :-)
I've been selected to compete in the #TXST Public Speaking Festival on Thursday. SO EXCITED! Prof said there's a big trophy at stake.
A successful man is one who makes more money than his wife can spend. A successful woman is one who can find such a man. Lana Turner
Getting tired of always bein da bad guy
Las Vegas R-n-R marathon race packet pick up form lists "Name of airline, hotel, rental car, etc.." as "mandatory information" - I call BS
#songsplayedduringsex Bobby V- Sweetness RT if u agree! FaSho'
If there is light in the soul, There will be beauty in the person. If there is beauty in the person, There will be harmony in th
i really think that west vs. east shit was childish... 2many other niggas was in the middle that never shouldnt been it..
not that one but somethin elze like dat- mom sayz she haz to look at labelz next time she at fud store to rememberz
sure :) but can i do it after i am done with doing something i am doing now :)
looks like some of the guys behind you had a gravity issue!
In school , all I can think about is Austin. 💗 -Ally
I wanna meet my crush in person!!!
Follow your bliss and the universe will open doors where there were only walls. - Joseph Campbell
WeHear Alec Baldwin will guest star on Anger Management with Charlie Sheen is in the works!! now that will rock the house!! lol
- i don't know.
Carleton College, I'm coming to you on Wed. Will be in Northfield, MN, for 3 days.
Especially with caps lock on. RT : MUST NOT TWEET AND DRIVE.. MUST NOT TWEET AND DRIVE..
Happy Thanksgiving! Looking forward to the holiday & am thinking of troops overseas & those in countries where food is scarce ...
You look great in that pic! When do you graduate? Is it December or May? Missed you last night!
Oh my... what's the grossest 'hoarder' you've seen? I used to be obsessed with Fear Factor.
Ugh you know you are a catcher when your knees feel like you have arthritis when it rains
I think it's fcat writing I'm not sure, lol but they gave seniors field trip forms to not come tomorrow
Quality herbal supplements myNSP.con/CleanStart Check it out!!
When ur bestfriend messes around wih u too much.
i miss u. where have you been all my 92 years on earth
lol The sister's best friend...BTW, did you bag shorty last night?
Looking at drawings for our church expansion. Excited for that day!
For those wondering about the chat, just add three three hours to whatever time it is now where you are :)
We are continually faced by great opportunities brilliantly disguised as insoluble problems.
I believe you've misplaced your bag of dicks, sir. But never fear. I will feed them to you the next time we catch up. xo
Uh. As a Laker fan I want to say there's a comeback in them. Realistically. Kobe can't bring them back.
he can't dougie either
couldn't you build a jetpack in around 56 minutes or so instead?
did you realize that you are trending right this moment!
Check out the minutes Rondo, Pierce, Garnett and Allen played tonight.
love that record. "little cloud" is a choice cut.
I'm havin fish tonight!
I would love to call you but I have no way.
IF I HAD #1WISH I WOULD LOVE IT IF U FOLLOWED ME:)38
I was looking forward to seeing you too!!! Hopefully soon!
I am a flier making MACHINE! Tomorrow, back to working on records. Record shows are on the horizon.
Very good looking blog,and informative, will subscribe.
We offer Free Medications, Co-Pay Assistance, Low Cost Generics via our website. Let us know how we can assist your Take Flight
some are. but not all. :D when biking, i'm respectful of the signals and pedestrians. those who aren't usually get hurt. karma?
early bird gets the worm!!!!
So hold your head up high. They would kill to see you fall.
Long Beach💙
If you really put a small value upon yourself, rest assured that the world will not raise your price. ~Author Unknown
that's an exaggeration...
haha yeah man..some hand offs, couple corner routes lol
oh that sucks
New 18-Channel Data Acquisition System Introduced by Astro-Med
soon as i walk in...its silence...lmao...wow these hoes must be scared...lol..
NIALL what does 'one four three' mean when its sung in a song? ive been asking you this for about 50 times already!
Ah her we go... time to attack the Tea Party again. I'm so sick of this.
yes! It's aBYOD event (bring ur own dude). Today was the 1st coed DDC, nxt up Station 4
Did it stop raining?!
New site is finally up. Oh my GAWD! Looks great, folks are joining like crazy (thank you) and final edits still to be done
not gay.. just a faggot
FCPA: SEC charges former CEO of Noble Corp, 2 individuals, which included the former controller and head of internal audit.
Can't miss my calling !
. Nah, I'm enjoying my temporary single life too much to watch THE ENGLISH PATIENT or some shit like that... ;)
That 3-digit number in #Korea is the dumbest of all. That makes ppl have too many accts at too many banks
What a peachy day today! Peach oatmeal for bfast, peach tea for class, peach kefir for snack. Totally unintentional!!
"No Smoking" is actually posted on the hotel gym's list of rules. Otherwise everyone would be lighting up on the treadmill and stuff.
we use chunky in our house
I once smoked a million blunts in Hollywood with Devin The Dude
Just had a very awkward who-opens-the-door-for-who encounter with a guy from the 4th floor. Never making eye contact again.
Let's go rousing sermon!!!!
Off to a ballroom dance lesson! <3
Me: "Honey, I'm home!" Me: "Oh I forgot. He's in Miami."
just thought I'd let you know I got 8:01 at our last race!!! IM SO CLOSE I CAN TASTE IT!!!! But anyways, how was Italy??
sweet. It was 70 degrees here today. I'm loving school. Wish I would have done this long ago.
I am looking forward to working with Brent Olds in the studio tomorrow!
Wearing a Carolina blue tie despite yesterday's debacle.
aww!! Thts not fair! You Guys didn't tell me you were talking about that thing;p while I was getting slapped by Josh d'anna;P
you from the okc or something?
And she met Damon first. Oh dear god. 😂😭
getting my tan on just call me #oilchange he is no #evalongoria more like
I know right?! I beat all those other girls ;)
connect with She has all the details!
Right? RT Not thrilled to have DeMeco Ryans coming into the NFC East.
...saturated w/your heart’s blood-you will either write or you will not-& the only way to find out whether you will or not is to Try-J.Tully
no motivation to study for the psych final tomorrow
Just finished Giallo. HORRENDOUS! Who's idea was it for Adrien Brody to be both the lead and the killer!?
I guess I should paraphrase Freud, "sometimes a tweet is just a tweet."
Trazzler buzz, my ass.
Feel free to substitute or add as many non-starchy vegetables as you wish
#SAYSOMETHIN Am I going insane? My blood is boiling inside of my veins An evil feeling attacks My body's shaking, there's no turning back
My french penpal is a directionator..
Trade Kobe??? I may sound crazy, but for the future, they may need to explore it. I'm just sayin'
thanks man, they'd better win
2 hours till home. You still have time to throw a "welcome home" party.
I saw a guy on the train checkout a woman and said to him, "you should take a picture, it lasts longer"
Had a meeting for future commercial endorsements this morning. That went wonderful =) #Young Business Woman
Joy in one's heart and some laughter on one's lips is a sign that the person down deep has a pretty good grasp of life
Are you going to be touring at all outside NYC?
Niqqqa Only bitxh he got wet was his mermaid tatt ! (sneak dissers)
You can't control everyone elses behavior all you can control is your own
it was all cute and sweet c: ha
&#39;Scary Spice&#39; wants to become an Aussie
Good morning, everyone. Happy Thursday! May be getting an apartment today; fingers crossed!
YOU will never know unless you take a chance. Don't be afraid. Fear is a great destroyer and the keeper of nowhere.
thanks for checkin it mane
Sorry, I don't make first moves.
take it to the head !
well, considering the fickle winds of musical taste, whistling will be back in style in weeks, if not days.
How cool!
Oh #swamppeople, one of them is gonna lose their hand!
Yep! Also found out - cousins in Spain, Burma/Myanmar, Germany, and Hungary, too! (in addition to the gypos on dad's side.)
The church needs to act. We need to make this know. Join us for
.keep up the great work!!! Your hilarious!
- Congrats to you and your wife. (Harper shares her b-day with racing legend )
If you use the discount code tavern20, you receive 20% off your September order on brewcityonline.com
How does a Real Estate company sell its office without causing confusion?
if anyone has any job leads, I would appreciate it - thx in advance!
Browns are acting like this game is over. They need to wake the heck up! Like to see the coach start calling guys out.
ain't going to get bored just on my shit bro got to get back into football shape
BEAUTY TIP: Keep a dryer sheet handy to fight winter hair frizz - simply rub over hair and ta da.
Shout musical tonight! :
when r you guys back in LA? Did you get the other songs I emailed you?
I'm freaking out!
I've discovered that south jersey looks just as southern as south and north Carolina.
much better gonna miss the game tonight
Meeting went great today with CAA. Meeting with networks last week of March! YAY
can i get a shout out?
Mofos act like you gonn die if someone unfollows them! So da fuck what!! Just Get another follower asshole.
you'll be splitting it with me. Was concerned over my streak going into that at bat. Haha.
Better Call Saul
Thanks for following LakeTravisIns.
I refuse to cheer anything Larkin Dance Studio does. Performs weight checks on their dancers. Dress their young dancers in skimpy outfits
SO SO PUMPED FOR #BOYFRIEND!!!!! its gonna be amazingg!! <3 #30MINUTES!!
thanks!! i'll try to meet you girls at alberto's on the flip side!!
what is ya e mail addy?
I'm prefect in the east. 11 of 16 left in sweet 16. 7 of 8 & all final four left.
Oh great...these people are looking at me like it was my fart that murdered this elevator...
Genius is more often found in a cracked pot than in a whole one
Eric's poem is "Diesel," and is the February 2011 POTM. Armine Iknadossian is represented in January 2011 with "New Year."
Greenie, did Magic and Isiah lack passion because they kissed before the championship game? Don't be ridiculous..
Went to buy a song from iTunes and I have $1.28. -.- seriously?
RT : Eff yeah! Tijuana Brass: tequila, tangerine, Mexican lager, agave, egg whites. nailed this one.
I need to tweet it up to get to a thousand tweets so be ready to be annoyed this week by me.
The Lion King !
me please :P
So cool! so much fun!
Threw up in my dream and woke up feeling like I was gonna puke.
Good weather outta nowhere
i shoulda bought tickets back in December!! they were so cheap
Hi Jacqueline its the real me..can you DM me? Thx
i'm imperfectly perfect
Overheard at FD: "Have you ever had Wienerschnitzel? It's the best thing ever!" ^_^ do you agree?
Listen to this Monday 4/23 to hear tell it like it is as comedian, mayor & farmer - not necessarily in that order
Great film. I'm ashamed to say I shed a tear there at the end. Dried it up before the wife and kids caught me though
54 holes of golf with Barack, then lunch and margaritas. Man, I LOVE this job!!!!!
This old dude in Wyoming just asked if I wanted to blow one. He was referring to smoking grass. That doesn't make sense.
Its always been "Adam & Eve" not the other way around. So if men did better maybe women would too. We are"Ribs"a piece of YOU.Remember that.
While I dance I can not judge, I can not hate, I can not separate myself from life. I can only be joyful and whole. ~ Hans Bos
now at me ni damn
Music saves lives
Truth or dare?
would be cool if grocery stores let you use that stick that separates your items to beat the person behind you with
pairing suggestion?
People mean well, but still make a mess
Is there a Tap Takeover Tonight?! "Yes" would be nice, "all day" would be better and "all drafts $1" would be ideal!
Another trend we've seen are apps that help manage the huge increase in user generated data and content
Of course! There are so many great choices in that area, but that is one of my favorites :)
No--just got back from Austria and I'm behind on emails? Wanna resend?
just bought my tickets!
it feels so good to finally be home... christmas party tomorrow at the richard childress vineyard
Can't wait to watch tonight! That show's friggin amazing :)
The people who think they are crazy enough to change the world are the ones who do. -Steve Jobs
would be soo awesome! Lmao actually been practicing what I think is the scene they might use for the audition
Part of I-25 was shut down in #CastleRock overnight after a body was found in one of the lanes. Tune into for details.
This is shaping up to be a pivot week. Major move time. Close to breaking support level again.
Thanks so much! We can't wait
thanks so much for the follow! If we can help with a new mattress or some new furniture let us know! Plz help spread the word!!!
Oh man, I have work until 1 in Encino. If you can be in the 2nd half, I'd love to catch you!
most loyal
check your cc they already charge me for NYC Marathon.
starting to understand why coffee shops are so popular in Seattle. Rain rain rain here in Denver.
Think Arsenal have any chane in the 2nd leg?!
Karachi is next!!!
Awesome! RT : I'll be there!!
How the fuck did Pau Gasol go from playing the hotel manager in Home Alone 2 to playing on the fucking Lakers?
Hrm. Looks like people tweeting idiotic things from CPAC is going to drive me away from the feed today.
A #BFTeachingTip - #Teachers send us your classroom curriculum in an EXCEL sheet and we'll upload them to our servers in flashcard format.
I was looking for a cough drop and I found a KitKat. That'll do.
“: “: even more so, chefs who go to other bars and drink in their whites #kitchenpetpeeves”” omg
Loved You!
oh, salty
Being Broke is never no kind of option...
In 1849, fire erupted in St. Louis, Mo., resulting in the loss of three lives, more than 400 buildings and some two dozen steamships.
i'm happy for her :)
LMAO I was just wondering stephanie -.- no need to repost that.
It is part of beer geek code. I hate everything I do but I am glad you enjoyed it.
One game at a time....“: NESN >> Celtics Could Face Even Greater Schedule Challenges in Second Round.
You need some tea with honey, STAT!
Hey!!! we'll see you on , right? Looking forward to it! Going to be an awesome time!
Thx for your input. I feel the same way. Very curious if and why people still use Foursquare and how brands/places engage them
“: Okay who wants a new Jay Cutler picture?” picture or dart board cover?
lol yeah ima change it back probably tomorrow
glad I have company! :)
loving you is like food to my soul
if I send you money for you buy an Iphone for me, you can buy and send to me? I can not buy here is too expensive :(
I'm already having anxiety about having to publicly speak on Sunday! How am I going enjoy my weekend?!
Dont know. but his older brothers were. they were egging him on to do it. Once saw a woman purposely place infant on the field
I agree!
Sure, but don't forget to over tip if you're doing that. And don't linger long after you're done. Servers appreciate it.
We thank you for sharing your photos and memories. It's an honor to hear about all of the wonderful moms. Please continue to share your...
But what's the point of cutting all your hair off then putting extentions
yeah Derek she's gone way to far this time. In front of the kids too. Just ask Kennedy. I'm done.
that movie was pretty suckish
THanks for the follow, Travis - link isn't working tho!
RT : Write content for the user; keep the search algo in mind.
London, Britain get ALL the good tv shows with getting awards!! Hahaha
We're getting out at 1!
ahah we werent mean , we were truthful :D
Everyone see the KC Star and giving SKC some love in the paper today? Lots o soccer in the paper...
fist bumps for for the RT's of our blog post!
Thanks for the follow! Followed back :)
Working hard trying to keep the lights on and the rent paid
Sitting on a coffin drinking coffee I wore black on black with negative feelings
follow ing need it
thanksnfornthe follow. I figure if you work out a lot, maybe it will rubb off on me.
ha! I said I punched my lil brother
Standing room only at Boyle Heights History Night at Libros - Boyle Heights!
I love Andre 3000
can't stand joey logano
Ricky's going to think what's cute? Lol What's your Dailybooth?
My Days Are Terrible If I'm Not Seeing Money!
true dat when i see a 50 yr old couple dancin together i so wish werz my true love at???
Specials tonight: braised lamb shoulder w carmalized onion polenta cake, roasted baby cabbage, bacon, apples, & Dates, Yuummmmy!
I won't be pressured into having fun just because we arbitrarily use a base-10 number system and a big round number is coming up.
Now in stock! Addena gloves in XS Extra Small Shadow, Black Nitrile PF Exam Glove (SHD930) Extra Small Phantom Latex PF Exam Glove (PHM910)
kari is dyeing all my hair black :D this is gonna be so different~
Hey Ryan! How's it going?
I got a lil buzz to..
Let's say hi to people who don't even know who we are!......Hi there! :) #drivingdowntown #creeping #I<3Indy!
NACA Tomorrow... so excited to Rockthe Cause.
That awkward run you do when a car lets you cross the street.
That's a problem to be solved. Higher Ed is not just about the student. It's about society, economy, republic. Not transactional.
finally at halloween town level! i love halloween town!! music is so much better than other levels which just drive me crazy
Oh geez, did u get a free bowl of soup with that hat?
Will the market manipulators pull the DOW back to zero or positive by 3pm CDT? They are making a run for it.
I'm dwarfing it up!
Thanks for following us at ActingInLa
wanna add me on one of those calls?(:
Hawks and Rangers dont play until like Feb. They wont be on anyway. Nice try though.
Crawfish! Home is good
u did
You know that one person who you always think about how much you hate them while yoo're fucking them.
Just got the vinyl at schubas! looks amazing and the show is all sold out.! (via )
Cano doubles in Jeter! #Yankees lead!
Thanks!! We like it here, too :)
you can do it! hope you got your fill of rollercoasters.
Alaric omg. No. Bitch please, he should be resistant to dying, he's died like 5 billion times. Omg no. Please just come back. D:
Love it! Totally going to work something like this in to a class I'm teaching next year.
Playing around with some song ideas.
I need to find a real job. Like one where I don't find bags of illegal substances on the floor.
is that your tumblr?
What's up with all these boring ass movies my teachers show me ? 😒
Was sitting at church and my pandora radio station on my phone turned on full blast.
i actually dont know:/ I just saw people tweeting about it:/ Sorry gurl!
Sure wish we could be there! No babysitter :( Good luck! DL! I know you'll kick-ass for #Memphis 2nte! Mr. Funny man!!
": Fuck u looking like the love child of suge knight n some dirty whore from compton"
check out my new website www.flawlessmoneygang.com free ringtones and we have beats for sell
Well hello(: who are you? Lol
Thank you for following us. And...ear infections suck! Good luck.
You going to have a chapter devoted to your colin-isms in your book? M
What is your favorite type of paint for exteriors?
its taxis sono qui in italian
#prettyprogressive is a community show so we welcome your feedback! "It's not any of our fault but ALL of our problems" -
Shoutout To My New Follower
Okay, I lied. Have to report that Jonathan Lethem is wearing sneakers with green shoelaces, and Robert Krulwich of Radiolab is moderator
She is lacing her boots. She is charging her phone. She is totally over the blindfold. Justice is bulletproof.
Gotta say, the 10 a.m. movie at Star is freaking genius.
Today is the drawing for the winner of their choice of Hampton Bay fans installed by Delmark Electric for #free!
A2. Some stigma can start with the self, can be easier to let someone remain ignorant instead of engaging/challenging their views
Nicely put. Thanks for sharing that with us! ^NE
It wants you to call it "bartendering".
#kids Rivers of Steel Sunday Heritage Market: Rivers of Steel Sunday Heritage Market from Sunday, May 20, 2012 at 10:00 AM to Sunday, May...
Just got back from homecoming with Makena. Was pretty fun! I'm exhausted now lol.
“: I wish Carl would take me back!” what is this about haha?
You know it's a good day when is listening to Pandora's Disney station
Laugh as much as you breathe and love as long as you life!!!
RT : After much thought, I've decided to vote YES on the SAG/AFTRA merger. We are stronger together than we are apart....
UN predicts on October 31, the world population will pass 7 billion
You are very kind for helping us get the word out today! Hope to make everyone's day after tax day!
Just witnessed the worst comeback of all time...
thank u luv
Thank you for the follow! :))
#ThatOnePersonWho ruined your life because they are selfish...
English prof: "it's been real."
needs to increase his vocabulary; calling folks, "loser" is getting old. So is bullying.
Indoor strength training. I don't run in the rain. However, I love walking in the rain :-)
I don't think you'll need anything unless you wanna buy stuff and eat. We'll probably be together for an hour and a hallff.
Tired of the FACEBOOK WARS I have going on. People are so lame.
I Am Not A
Bahaha! #GoDonald RT : #DWTS for the second consecutive evening...Man card disappearing like "Back to the Future" family pic.
That's the future
RT “: why does every dude think he is going to be in the UFC?”
Thanks Marquez for following :)
Travis giving Wes the blues
I just watched a woman yell at a man for riding his bike because her dog was afraid of it
There's been more perfect games in baseball history than 4 home run games
Swagg it out or fuck it.
No problem!!:)
Waking up from a nap and first thing I see is a HUGE spider just inches away from me...not cool.
Making choices.
Getting ready for the LAST regular season edition of Rip City Update! We have a live audience in studio today, it's gonna be a blast!
#AlphaOut. This alpha needs some Starbucks, asay-p. Replies later, in about an hour. You guys can get along without me until then, right?
I love when formatting a word doc takes far longer than actually creating the content of the word doc.
Highest upside starter between the ages of 19 and 7 months and 20 years and 9 months?
he be my hero
We are currently hiring an experienced barback/busser. Email
lol well I'm not gonna explain it ...duh Xavier
A New Arts and Innovation Lab in NYC - This looks like it is going to be something great!!
Is it baseball season yet? Let's go Brew Crew!!!
The only thing that would cheer me up today would be singing an impromptu rendition of How Deep Is Your Love with
Apple Jacks or Fruit Loopz. Lol decisions decisions.
what bitch.....bitch!?
is it tomorrow finale??
Fuck your judgment.
did u make roiworld? r u THE romi or roiworld? of am i hallucinating? lol
au bon pain coffee is really good (I learned my lesson from yesterday and did half caf).
What do you think about my new icon on Twitter account with and her Maui #love her brown hair!
This season of softball is only getting more and more frustrating.
Good morning (: Friend♥
ditto sir.
Great coaching team of middle-school girls for Oregon Game Project Challenge, sponsored by
when are you dismissed love?
i wouldnt mind a nice cold beer right now!
Good evening. Are you going to church worship services tomorrow?
The author of SOPA and PIPA are clueless when it comes to technology. If they want to know how to take down sites they should ask Anonymous.
"The Notebook" is trending my fav romantic movie and my future husband in it lol
I'm gonna make your head burn
Hahaha YES! RT Wearing my turban to the city standing next to an Indian with a turban on on the platform
Four months until my birthday!! :)
I love how you didn't catch that
She makes me happy
yeah people say he does but theres none on his tumble.
what is your opinion in the stock, you think it will make a come back? I'm thinking of buying it....
The rain yesterday must have caused this flu. As well as inflamed tonsil! Yikes. Gotta recover faster! No time to lose.
yeah my Kerry/Edwards tatt didn't work out as planned either. ( ._.)
Arkansas bound!!! 😄✈
awww thank you ! “: :/ hugs and kisses cheer up baby <33”
I got some caulk for that crack 🚀
thanks, it should be fun!
I wonder if Adele has ever heard someone say "What the hell Adele?!?"
Pour me a cup when you turn up
Thank you! RT : Big Congrats to Real Unifi Team for Best of CES award! You make it!
tweet stealer
Congrats on East Division Title and earning 2 seed in upcoming #SECsoftball Tourney
5 more minutes!!!
Like the concept but I'm with you on the time factor
Wow! Cathy thanks for making one of my quotes your favorite. I feel special! :-)
Hey Vin if u see this i need ur help. My friend has been being bullied n now she wants to kill herself! Whats should i do??
Now it's cool for straight dudes to dress gay...how u with your girl and your pants tightier then hers kno she lookin for the quickest exit
First time I've actually seen someone get a ticket for jaywalking.
My favorite female rappers ; && . That its all.
Thanks for the RT!
MAX is stopped at the Salmon station. Been sitting here 10 minutes. Apparently someone on the train ahead of us had a seizure but is OK.
put it in a braid to the side so you could see the bflz lol
I don't like it when my parents are home because then I can't eat freely :(
Despite the early morning heat, it looks like SlamFiction will continue. until at least June 9th. Or I could start going 2x per week...
A #Scorpio is wise beyond their years
What is the most important thing you look for when purchasing a class, lesson, activity or camp?
✋ hold up
#WordsYouWillNeverHearMeSay I Hate You
Some days the coffee kicks in, some days it don't.
And everybody down with them. Diva ass wack nukka
Los Angeles. I have returned.
I love you
": Simple bye can make us cry. Simple joke can make us laugh. Simple care can make us fall in love."
Baylor tarp of shame knows no limits
Nat'l Conf Day 1 Welcome bienvenid members, partners & staff looking fwd to meeting you all
Yo son you gotta take me to get them clarks...
Hi there! And how are you liking THE DARLINGS? Was just about to start that myself.
"Live by the spice, die by the spice!" -
I'm dieing its so cold outside ! my window is stuck and i cant close it ugh...
#KCMO Mayor Sly James visits #Rotary 13 this week to share his vision for #KansasCity. Calls for unity.
thanks! We are going to try out the #noda #gallerycrawl tonight with our new 4-legged friend :)
simmer down lol
RT : Been off the grid for a bit. // Go back off. Nothing new here. EXCEPT GOOGLE+ (Meet the new boss, same as the old boss)
#ttt11 #ala11 adding social tech to reading - e.g., get badge for reading first romance novel; libraries should encourage
THEN BOOM... BABY MOMMA BABY DADDY... NO WEDDING.. NO RING
Party Rock Anthem <3 My 2011 Song Of The Year ;D
I caddied for 4 years in Ireland, our next outing should be drunk minigolf
My Mother's favorite bird!
Hey! We saw you on our wall of fame..congrats on tacking the pounders....now you can follow us on here!
My Momma gave me my baby shoes today. They're 43 years old and they're beautiful! I almost cried!
Ok, want to know the definition of irony? - consisting of, attended with, characterized by, or containing iron: "Iron Man's suit is irony"
Now you just need to figure out which of you is playing Anne Frank. I vote Candy!
I do think Simon should have been allowed 2 speak. Ridiculous how Sonja accepted speaking engagement w/condition only she could
Don't judge me until you know me. Don't underestimate me until you challenge me. And don't talk about me until you talk to me!
(C) every single year. Smoking ISN'T cute or hot no matter what anyone says. It is INCREDIBLY bad for you and just because your idol is (c)
People only like that Jesus vs Religion video because it rhymes
I would like to see on your stage this year!
If you don’t know how much you can spend, you’ll certainly spend a lot more than you can afford.
libra all day long
And, NO, we are not planning on moving any time soon.
Congrats to Mary Krauss for winning the Ballerina Coloring contest, way to go Mary! You've got an Opening Night gift card coming your way!
; I will lemme get on my computer (;
Ate at Village Inn,and went to The Stripper Club.Tits and Ass. my favorite!
im fine ...how bout yu
RT : Activity without planning is a great reason for failure in life.
ill tell em after u tellem bout dem tuna rice cakes u got bakin n da oven.lol
Congrats to Katy Perry and Russel Brand. I'm not a fan of Katy Perry but good luck Russel!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Follow Me on Twitter!!!
I haven't been this sick in a long time.
that 4th and 26 play was definitely in Philadelphia, and I'm not even a Packer fan... come on now
Congratulations to Eric Dawson for winning NBA D-League Impact Player of the Year! Much deserved after a ton of hard work and dedication!
you slept with relentless effort
Oh my fucking god. Someone shoulkd have kidnapped me tonight.
why u wear those thick frames bro its not cool ya look like a tool
Good information at #GartnerIAM. Enjoying the show!
Granted, I'm being churlish. But I paid plenty for the privilege of being possessive (not defensive), as you will too soon enough.
6 hours and 5 minutes until pre sales for "Rise From Zion" begin! You guys are going to love this!!!
wat day cuz i gotta know before hell week
I just took the 2012 Industry Survey! Glad to help!
Another lunch dt. For mrs.christenson tomorrow. Fun.
da heck? Lol that's kind of weird, but yes I know him xD
Like that will happen. The only way BC football coaches get fired is if they interview with the Jets.
I've been meaning to thank you for the article you wrote about Scott Stack and me. You did a great job on it.
like r u srs right now
LOL! That would happen to you. Have a safe flight!
Lol u look like ur starin directly at the sun bro
#2011icf Another take on procrastination: could be your intuition telling you its just not the right time or you don’t have enough info yet.
plz follow back ;D
i love the avi <3 brunettes kick ass :))
gi there.. I'll talk to ya :-)
Health Ranger interviews Dr Ed Group, from Global Healing Center, Jan 2012: via
Dance party in my living room!
Looking for great in-store demonstrators nationwide! Please DM with your information and location!
We r excited! MT : in Apr I'll transition fr to work w to set up UK Centre for Justice Innovation
Malone you are the AT&T of people #Britta'd
without a doubt.
g imy2 n idk im bout to now
Great day: nice walk to Harlem for amazing lunch and later happy hour
#np asap rocky
we are going there this week! we need to pick a day.
Exile, for no other motive than ease, would be the last defeat, with no seed of future victory in it.
6:30PM I throw out the 1st pitch @ Fountain Hills Little League Baseball opening night @ Golden Eagle Park. Catchers best be well protected.
RT: Great advice for dry winter lips RT : Be sure to exfoliate your lips--they're an extension of your skin!!!
Mention me if you want me to
The only way that goal is any better if Espinoza actually gets it. He is trying so hard and deserves a goal.
i think it will be nice :) . other than that like i said I have some creative projects that I want to start working on, I'm in
thats really cool idea!
love the photo galleries, great stuff.
oh gosh that sounded like I was bragging..
Oh jesus, so you'll only be giving people shots and taking their vitals...not important at all.
Just send a care package with a razor and some shampoo.
Nice day for a wedding
who say the video??? the one i just posted??? RT or tweet me if you did! :)
hmm.. unfollowed me... so imma unfollow him! he's lost all the love I had for him.
Thrift stores/donations is where gets MOST of her clothes! :D she likes them used haha and she doesnt wash them... oh lmao
Loving all the Actofest tips from and others.
Jesus gave me 3 yesterday - faster than a speeding bullet! Could've missed His hand attending this morning's MOPS meeting.
(I have to give this a shot) Steely Danzig with the Stars
will take a wannabe Deion fielding punts from 1 over birds getting Luck. Good win birds.
becareful not get ur ass struck by lightning jk
On a brighter note...
I got a 94 on my Chem test!
aw thank you!
The North Face Athlete Alex Honnold Feeds the BeastDenali - north face hiking
Via a strategic partnership, we are now offerng business consulting services. Email for more information.
thanks Chris! That is one of my new faves!
ooh and i just might be visiting post-cannes for a good week! hope to see you then
Big daddy on netflix, chyesss.
Beautiful pic. Have fun today!
Actually addicted to nantucket nectars orange mango ...
Life is like a box of chocolates. It is worthless unless you take a bite and enjoy it.
There is no better feeling than retrieving data that was both deleted from an #SDcard and stored on a fried hard drive
Booked a principal role of a Struggling Actress in Mid-Life Crisis in 15-MINUTES a new Webisode Series for The Vie Network: Shoots June 2011
Yeah it's the Wayport connection from 'The Golden Arch' =)
happy to! (and followed.)
Whole* on my
it's raining aw i love the rain im so happy (:
I need to sleep soon -_- I didn't have my full nap today
5TH ANNUAL G' S DAY PICNIC TODAY!!! SUNDAY MARCH 18TH AT THURGOOD MARSHALL PARK
Good morning beautiful people! Who needs a fresh look for summer? Sam has openings today! Come on in!
agreed, Though I think the other issue is do we mean classroom teaching only? Administrators (some) do play a role educating
Looking for something to do with your kids in the Pittsburgh area (you know, besides visiting Gemini)? Check out
Hey it's BK, Are you going to see new movie The Hunger Games, this weekend, gonna wait, or not interested?
Perfect day for a can of skoal citrus.
I am totally over blowing this project. I'm incapable of keeping things simple.
why do you want your memory erased?
Together again: Star, director and producer reunite for musical
"I TOLD HER SHE SHOULD COME AND ROLL WIT K.I.D"
this event will be the biggest of the YEAR.....especially after cruz control puts in work sunday again the cheese heads....
Sometimes I'm too nice, I let shit slide just because.
Dear past, stop tapping me on the shoulders. I don't want to look back.
"How old will I be when you are 40?" "You'll be dead." Ah Draper, that definitely is your kid.
issues correction: is now thrilled with New York lawmakers instead of dissapointed I <3 NY
Are you looking for hip hop, hyphy, dirty south, r&B, new school, or vibe type of beats and music production?
MOH speech success.
I'm totally used to it by now. I mean, I've lived here 4 years!!!
OK, we have to boost this fine company, Enterprise Hive on twitter. What is this - 67 followers?!?! make it 6700!
Swamp people with so I can really feel like I'm on the bayou.
A pair of powerful spectacles has sometimes sufficed to cure a person in love. ~ Friedrich Nietzsche
I thought it was funny. Your line of questioning is reminiscent of a John Lieberman or even a Steve Langford.
thank u heff!!
RT : you frighten me [try working with him ... oh boy]
It's unusual...but I'm indeed calling it a night on this glorious Saturday. Chilling on my couch right now just feels so good
This morning was a fun 15-miles on fire roads. Final long run before this weekend's #BTR100K. Tested out Carbo Pro and Salomon Pack.
That's reasonable. I live on the Power Nap schedule, lol. I'm the king of the 20 min super nap.
(In lil Wayne voice) Oh my God Becky look at her butt !!
Idk what it is but I like talking to you
Imani (plotting to create a business to rival the Corp): "'The Comp.' is my dream!"
Special teams ALL YEAR!!
there's way to have fun on new years b4 u can drink! Watch some sick music videos! Drink Gin&Juice, hold the gin.
Ok #braun was cleared, got it.
Least fun mother's day ever... Phone broke, running around town trying to get it fixed before 2 big trips. :(
5M: reports "light rain" but on camera, its looking like a downpour!
Moesha Marathon all day. I'm in there!! And next Saturday too??
LOVING the weather :)
happy b day brah
Come see GOCA too in the Plaza of the Rockies!
I never wanted a royal family in America before today... The wedding was amazing!! Fave part: TWO KISSES on the balcony!!! Heavy sigh
Morning spent in mgmt team meeting. Afternoon, finalizing an IRB proposal to study faculty perceptions of federated searching.
Men are the best cooks; because with 2 eggs, 1 sausage & a lil bit of milk, he can fill a girls tummy for 9 months. HAHAHA
Hey ! Thanks for the follow. Love your stuff!
Actually wasn't there...shocker!
Waiting for Justin Bieber at the Today Show <3
I'll see you @ Social Media & Organizations in Troy next Tuesday!
I think you are a hoot! I truly have not laughed so much in a workshop. You are an amazing intro to NYC. See you next week!
So glad you think so! Thanks! RT : 24 Diner is ridiculously good.
Yeah so we had another great event today. Then had some meetings at our offices before having a long collaboration session.
Thanks for following, Lucy! Wished you lived closer so you could take over my clutter!
Covering the Big Ten tourney for Bleacher Report. Iowa Mich. State now.
They tell me I'm a danger to myself, now the crazy train is ready to roll
I think you owe it all to your barber.
lol kinda Aha
sorry keith! I call today!)))
Schade Deutschland alles ist vorbei ? YOU PLAYED WELL AND BEAT THE CRAP OUT OF ENGLAND, AUSTRALIA, AND ARGENTINA!
Getting blinds put up today! Yayayay!
100episodes? Can't believe it? Believe it on Monday @ 7pm ET w/ & more!!
Focus on your org's presence within visitors' digital environment, what they're doing with the rest of their lives
now, its playoffs I'm watching & I predict Bulls probably win in 5 just by looking right now. giving Sixers at least 1 win, sorry
I have the sidewalk shoveled and now it's time to make ready for work.
The awkward little dance your thumbs do when you don't know how to reply to a text
And a shout out to whose presentation I'm having to miss!
thats the truth. sometimes it sounds like peeps are playing house.
I just saw some place here $1500 first and last months and a $1500 deposit. Apparently we are all rich 0_0
THANKS ZACH :) GET AUSTIN MAHONE VERIFIED
"Forgot About Dre" comes to mind.
DON'T CARE! DON'T GIVE A SHIT!
What's your favorite type of tournament? Mine personally is a no-top baker doubles, even though I can't find any of those anymore!
Thanks to & for following us! #KayuhBicycles making waves with our network.
I hear ya and wasn't disputing. Just adding my two cents...
We had such a nice time at Treasure Village last Sunday. Congratulations to Buddy and Shirley Greer on 50 years of ministry AND marriage!!!
RT : Scott Bell, Scott Bonilla and Scott Bonds still hitless
Watch my man on my new favorite show Paranormal Challenge!
Why is the 405 a parking lot at 11pm?!?
in DC 2012,March 26-27, 2012 A look into critical policy issues facing marketers
Woo! Good luck! Ive always wanted to try but not sure I have the patience! I'm sure it will turn out amazing :)
It will be communications-centric, so a lot of translating, writing newsletters, updating Web site, researching, etc.
I haven't seen you at #MAMSummit, yet! :(
Don't judge God and Christianity by Christians. Christians are just imperfect humans just like you. We screw it up pretty good sometimes.
#wheneverimbored I check my phone, even though I have no messages
do you know kimball?
Interactive ads and perfect placement. Let's kick the doors down and show the iPad tablet advertising world real results. Are you ready?
Thank you for tweeting our blog story! Sending #love from #SanDiego! :D
4 Course Vegan Meal for Valentine's Day! February is healthy heart month, so share your love for your heart as it pounds for your lover...
:) Birthday Girl, you are so cool and hip! Good luck on your next album, Lauryn
Nice seeing tribe off to a good start. Can't take my off game for too long or disaster may strike.
Bravo on "Altitude Slickness." Genius title!
See my man Nate asked me if I gained weight, I said nah, my pockets got fatter, that's all!
back in NYC!!
Gevening tweeters! Driving is so exhausting.. but it was worth it
The Breakfast Club with Cath and !! :)
that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and killed him.
couldn't skip his class and I was sad 😞
looks good, want them open one up in nyc
I want to interview and so bad that it physically pains me to know that I haven't.
14" screen is great for a ultrabook!
earliest flight on the menu... hooded pullovers w/ the ill'nest geometry...
Last second decision - #1k1hr - right now! Preparation is not my strong suit.
I know what gay and lesbian is but I don't know what bi is....
What's up with Aaron Rodgers stache I'm just saying he looks like that dude in that commercial with the Handle Bar Mustache
"Very difficult loss??" Goodman? It should be described as a typical loss
Those who stay will be Victors
Hey back.
how would that differ from straight popular vote
quick correction—that was definitely a safety squeeze that tied the game; Arias didn't break until Blanco made contact
happy mothers day to the best mommaa around love you*:
i got the hottest snapback from the sickkest gear ever
Hmm my Twitter's so slow x/
what's going on?
God's grace is eternal and His promises are unambiguous. So count your blessings, not your hardships.
10+ Love the Voice! RT : On a scale of 1-10, how excited are you for tomorrow's #Battles?
#SanDiego! Who drove a #car2go today? Where did you go? We wanna hear about it !
I am drooling like OMG
ACG InterGrowth 2012 has officially wrapped! Thank you to everyone who helped make it happen!
Enjoy the little things in life, because one day, you'll look back and realize that they were actually big things.
Starting another week of classes.. Blah
"The pessimist complains about the wind. The optimist expects it to change. The leader adjusts the sails." ~ John C. Maxwell
All i see on my TL is twitter drama xD lol
_+-|_| G1 CERTIFIED WET TSHIRT CONTEST --- FRIDAY CLUB DRAMA --WANT TO GET IN FOR FREE?? TXT ME I WILL TELL YOU HOW---214 609 3316 --
Well lets do this then, we need to get out ur way. It's been too long. We'll look into Paninis and Nathans.
Loved the dungeon drop! The one I rode aint there no more.
It was aliens that enabled the pyramids, silly. Didn't you ever watch Stargate? jeez
"When there is no enemy within, the enemies outside cannot hurt you" - African Proverb. True dat.
My inability to gift wrap is actually slightly disturbing.
Billy Butt Sex! Instant CLASSIC!
Cool! RT : Save the date: On 11/30 will be experimenting with Google Hangouts as a reference tool. Stay tuned for more!
Be not the slave of your own past-plunge into sublime seas, dive deep..so you will come back w self-respect, a new power... ~Emerson
Haven't worked w/a BID 4 awhile, but I think one can use money raised 4 capital improvements. Would SDCC qualify?
Just received my Mothers Day card purchased from My mother is going to love it! Thx
HE GETS A D- FOR THE SIMPLE FACT YOU CAN NOT MISS FREE THROWS WHEN THEY COUNT THE MOST......
holy hell.. hahaa well since youre not coming you better kick butt at the meet!
I go to things like #THATCamp to remind myself just how much I'm missing and get inspired to do something about it.
Hi! The easy breather was easy for me to tell improvement. Difficult to measure this one. Will use it umpiring tonight. (1/2)
Some more beans, Mr. Taggert? I'd say ya had enough!
I am delinquent on transposing my Boulder Chautauqua notes ..
hey man, my friend Amanda did my website. She's pretty good. I can give you her contact info if you're interested
Working on songs sorry for the wait will be out soon..
In school lunchtime
one of my friends had sex with my ex :(
That's good, jusy a busy season? Uh oh, starting your own events and adventures huh? Going okay, better starting next week ha
remember.. I'm on your side.
Leland is the best
This is gonna be the shits woo RAGE!
That is hardcore!
Nice tweet everyone should feel Loved and be Loved it's a BEAUTIFUL thing
Getting rid of the jetta tmrw.
RT: You can send all beats to you got that bangger that he need <==Thanks Fam Check DM
this day is going great :)
who is in charge of sound for the Oscars this year? R2D2?
why when a person tries to judge u and they r wrong the sit there and fell salty lol
You are correct. All u can do is view your accounts and check balances, invoice customers.. It's basically read only & very limited
I'm glad I live in a comparatively more progressive state like New York otherwise I think I'd be locked up for murdering idiots.
i seen that bs but we comin back jst watch
Well Thank You For The Retweet And Allof You Are Twiiter Sexy Wow . Go Hard
I really can't stand dub step...I'm convinced it was made for people who can't dance normal.
Test brunches scheduled stay tuned for "Sunday Antidote" details. We're gonna put a new face on brunch in PDX
happy birthday girl
Wed Sept 15@ 3pm OPEN AUDITIONS for ALLEGRO DANCE CO at St Clairsville Ohio HIGH SCHOOL THEATER www.allegrodancecompany.net
I'm soo excited! 
What doesn't kill you makes you stronger. Except polio. Except polio...
I'll be there -- I'll be talking about multispectral imaging as used in the Livingstone Project to recover faded writing
Dear #pokeEJoes how in the hell do you run out of ribs? #smh you sell barbq
RT RT : "Give your best to each moment." David Adams of
thats a trip cuz he was saying he was the manager of ONYX..... Thanks for the response just checking this cats credentials
wassup big homie. sent you an email on FB. let me know when we can link.
Me and my best friend love watching your interveiws, Shoutout...follow..?<3
First one's on me at rolling stone bar and lounge!
Please follow back:))?
Real life Jersey Shore shit going down right now.
how far are you?
Thank you for the hug. It helped!
Thank you! RT : No. You can have chai without milk. Milk makes it a latte.
Did you know that WAYN Radio is Michigan's ONLY Alternative/Urban- Ethnic College Radio station? ...Well, now you do!
I hope my phone dies now so I can't watch anymore of these...*clicks to next in series*
nicee.Like a boss I assume.Me too.Writing a lot, Kinda studying music & Lyrics.
thank you Packy... :P I'm feelin the love.
A sense of humor is a major defense against minor troubles
Going to check who's not following me back and see if they're worth it. In that case not many
Thanks for the #FF!
My 4yo corrects me now. "I'm really not a baby Mom. You know that, right?"
Thanks much for including me!
as long as u got the love girl!!!;)
One complaint about today's Taco Bell: they put too much ice in my drink. I think I got through three sips of my Pepsi before it was gone.
I'll remember Carl Beane giving updates from #Fenway as I listened to & Richard Neer span the league on the weekends in the late '80's
Shoutout to Kimberly and Sasha(Can they sing Happy Birthday to her? PLEASE!) What kind of donuts do the Boyz like? :DD 1
get at me for the quality scissors you need to do the quality work peace
Some technical difficulties with the site on some browsers. Sorry for any inconvenience.
Thanks for being great partners working with on mobile apps. Looking forward to continuing partnership.
My moms making crab legs , STG - They Be BOMB ! Whose coming over 4 dinner : ) . Mhmm
Stewart platform works well for me but error logs suggests its still a little buggy :)
wish would come home already. feeling
At this point i'm annoyed at myself because i've allowed it to go on for to long.
- p.s. can't wait to work "parallax scrolling" into a coctail party conversation
As Musberger just said, "this is a mauling folks, just a mauling."
My defense sucked today! But a W is a W!!
Things rings so true. I am on the computer too much as it is--another reason why I will never buy a smartphone. Need to live.
I got 16 followers today and I just got a twitter account today! Mahomies keep following me and I'll follow you!!!!
Watching Death Race 2
Do a squeeze!
We've been at 183rd for a couple days now. There's only 7 days left!!! Please keep voting! www.refresheverything.com/operationsoundoff
I just improved my running, it really helped me a lot.
nigga, i'm five months pregnant how did you not know this?!
Brit Hume just hates #Newt. That is clear. He's losing credibility in my opinion in being objective in reporting political news.
#sincewebeinghonest I don't miss you, but I missed how you made me feel
Eww can't believe I dated that...
but how does ur mom look like yogi bear?
Just passed Garfield...*deep sigh* I'm home... Missing already. I hope u get some rest and that I was a decent guest >_<
I need an easy way for Outlook to count characters in email text. Help?
Damn LA traffic is testing my patience!!
you are welcome & have a good weekend.
Would love to assist on set, assist in post production. If anyone is in need of assistance, I am available.
My eyess<<< My feelings <<<< NOT IN THE MOOD FOR ANYONE
View feedback, however lousy it feels, as a gift. Picture pretty wrapping paper and a bow on it, offering you potential for growth...
I will rap battle at the store next time he is in town. can be the guest judge...
ok I'll be excited but not nervous, then!
I can take it whatever but im in chill mood to much to handle shit on mind cinderella in my Conner I have nothing to worry about
OMFGGG Who Ever Is Up!! Text Me& If You Dont Have Me Number Inbox Me For It Bored A'F
Um down whenev mane! u got my #?
He is, and he's quite good.
I guess i'll be honest I could use you around
Oh, you like to talk shit behind my back? You're in a great position to kiss my ass.
Listen to the beautiful, beautiful Rochester Rock 'n Roll TONIGHT on The Sunday Night Shakedown on 98.9 The Buzz!
N do those toe touches n the herky. Soo idk
I think I have a #christmas music addiction. I can't stop listening. and purchasing.
What a great Night!!! Not only did CrazyMary finish our new release: Dreaming In Brilliant Color, but the Giants won the Superbowl.
AMS student Matt Pittenger just booked a role in the production of "Caught" at the Zephyr Theater on Melrose. Congrats, Matt!
I know hunter save us from mark fuckerberg and send us the app
Is in a New York state of mind...
Sussman & Simcox Thanks for following me on Twitter! Don't forget to follow me on Google+
you aren't following so I can't Dm it
TGOD.. jet set!
Fantastic! Love what u do! Hep u dig us 2, and can help us find these guys! Best & success!
oh dear. Such as?!?
all the more reason these kids should know how stupid they are. :/
Lol I got hacked too :( I swear people I haven't heard any rumors about anyone. What r u all hiding anyways
|#quotes I am brave, but I take a view. It is an educated view. I am careful. I am not reckless.
I should have used that. "Don't you already know who I am? I'm big on teh internets." ;-)
Me too! I think it's so funny & well done! I luv it! :)
It has to do everything with Mayoral ability when people still hate based off ignorance.
Welp I've arrived to my destination. Everyone have a good day.
Listen, if you are not watching #Revenge on CBS (Wednesday night 10:00pm) you are doing yourself an injustice!
idk how you can say that becuase it is a totally different coference from the big east. And its their first year
Propeller Group's re-brand of communism blows the Ungovernables away.Too bad I can't hear it bc of the crazy loud video nearby.
Inserting DVD slips into cases, so happy with how they turned out!
The best thing about the future is that it comes one day at a time
follow please he my bestie he just got a twitter please follow
any links for the game?
I'm goin to buy the victorious album I already bought all the victorious school stuff 
Awe yeah!! Hittin' the slopes at Monarch today baby!!!
So good to see you in the #autismchat. Keep on the great work of embracing #autistics as they are!
Couldn't agree more
my dreams tho >
"Under what circumstance will people be able to think about information that is disturbing or threatening to their identity or way of life?"
after tomorrow, all the money i get now is going towards MagicTheGathering
I heard smoke has the edge tonight. Experts are crediting his teams decision to use "term oil" in the car.
txt me back
Listen to the passion of your soul, set the wings of your spirit free and let not a single song go unsung.
: #BasketballQuotes I dont want to be the next Michael Jordan, I only want to be Kobe Bryant - Kobe. ( thanx 4 da support! )
Aleksandra Nogina Thanks for following me on Twitter! Don't forget to follow me on Google+
you are welcome!!!! Retweet me? For all your Canadian pals!
I used to have a really bad habit of giving into peer pressure. Then my friends said it wasn't cool so I stopped.
thx for the heads up. ;)
If you obey all the rules, you'll miss all the fun. ~ Katherine Hepburn
Where do u work, again? I forget.
Wheatgrass shots are super gross #trying to be healthy... Working out looks like a lot of work.....
As well as interesting library/librarian/information/technology-related topics...
#echelon3000 is popping!!! in the building!!!
I Can't Let Go Of This Chase For Greatness
It is kind of awkward to be in the same car with your ex and his wife!
i'm a kiss up to all the right people 
ew leave me alone.
me too! Their sushi is amazing!
Kuroder getting rocked
This just in: 300 bottles of Surly Smoke. 10% discount if you buy a case...
Darth Prosser finds your lack of faith disturbing.
Hi--you are invited Wed., May 2nd, 3:35 pm - 8:00 beer, wine or soda. Kathy W., Monique & I will b @ the cottage....
Thank you very much for the #ff! Women interested in their overall health definitely should follow you!
Arizona Western College's Mathew Anderson to speak at CHEA Annual Conf. and Intl. Seminar: www.chea.org/About/2010AC/2010_ACIS_Final.asp
yea I guess u did
Swear I'm drinking until pass out
Lacrosse is the sexiest sport and played by the sexiest people<3
aptly timed reminder
Placido Domingo will be honored as the 2010 Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year.
Hey Green Room! What's the weirdest prop you have ever worked with or seen used in a play?
we have the Go Pass so we can try to meet at a later production.
starting in June: #Skype #lessons (#piano, #jazz & #impro for all instruments). send me a message if interested & thx 4 spreading the word.
#ItsAllFunAndGamesTil you stick your hands in my food -___- back the fuck up!
burned 276 calories doing 35 minutes of "Running 11-min mile with hills"
Tip 5: Stay Focused on your Date -You've asked for her time and she generously agreed to share her time with you so don't waste her time.
style wars starting at opera.
You have to start somewhere. Props on starting.
Angel Remy Martin
your goop subscription is rescinded
I miss you to. We read them together!
If it is right, it happens—The main thing is not to hurry. Nothing good gets away.
Out here at the O.co drunk as fuck rit now, blunts on me I need my sideline pass the security wont let me down on the field.
Learning how to change the world thru love, compassion and consistency. Yesh?
thank you for the Bembe disc!! let me know <3 *big hugs* and many blessings Carlos!!!
Hi! Checking in. Things are OK.
Ending slowly but surely...
Ebook Models on a District Level - Richard Hasenyager, Director for Library Services, North East ISD, TX
it's been my life dream to just see you in person and tonight that happened! THANK YOU! #NeverSayNever! Follow me! <3 :)
Is your faith strong enough to sustain your increase?
Wade buss dat boy nose lmao.
Attention Members of the House of Delegates: They have cake in the Senate.
I RSVP'd for Saturday on facebook do I have to do anything else?
I got to play a Portuguese Folk harp today! I love playing an instrument that seems to pick you up and drop you in another place and time.
How is it that the pen is mightier than the sword if actions speak louder than words?
Great day for a parade and festival! Come see us at the Festival today and tomorrow.
Lost my damn debit card lol ain't shit on it doe haha good luck niggas
FYI - I've been attending films at the Florida Film Festival this week - will be posting reviews probably next week. Look for them!
Buy a christmas angel and get a dollar for dollar spent in a discount for a Gift Cert or ride with us!! Save the reciept 480-255-5559
Nick Blackburn, hot damn he's awesome. I love that we've got him on the team and actually let him pitch. He's twice as good as Liriano!
So the blonde girl with 12 Bumpits in her hair was not a stripper. It was Miss Ohio!!! cc: @
any update on status of Tramon Williams?
that's my show yo!!!
Wine tasting does keep going up. I think they do apply the tasting fee toward a wine purchase though!
Force touchdown pass to McRae, extra point is good, cutting the Predator lead to 3, 17-14.
Watching both nba games on espn! Who else is!?
Using Coldplay for a NASCAR promo is pure hi-larity.
I took that project management class!
I've been slacking on #twitter today. Looking forward to second training session at the gym! Probably one of the best choices I've made
- Awesome! I'm going shopping!!! Thx!
Martin Mueller: "The scholarly explorer of our textual heritage in digital form is perforce chief cook and bottlewasher." [+]
"Together, we're unlimited." I love you . Nothing will ever change that. Nothing. #foreverandalways? #happytenmonths <3
guitar center sessions about to come on just when I need it!
Yes, I did adult & infant, & the fact that I'm about to have a baby made me nervous.
RT : RT : Country band from Stillwater, OK will be playing March 30th !...
Book Time Now!
Thank you! I am honored!
: and I are nicar, wishing you were here. Must join us in 2013. You'll love it.
not all of us ;)
Yoga Zone U Rock
"The favor of God is only to be had by doing good to men: to #God, nothing men can do, can be of any direct service" (sic). WT Inquiry
nahh I'm hanging with my mom and shopping for DC in a week and a half<3 :D #SoExcited (:
#Jelena :D Love em both! they're so cute together :)
of course of course! I love you!
why do all the milkshakes bring the boys to the yard? And why are they better than yours?
Ms. Curry #Communications xD
yes sir
I always feel so old when I'm at the orthodontist
Good Monring Tweet-hearts! Welcome back Monday!
Unfollowed yo ass right back. You ain't slick.
Today I really miss so I'm giving her the hookup to all these wonderful alt porn sites I just discovered.
": kids a scientist. it fits right?"Absolutley! I would have added him if i could remember what his damn handle is
Going through my voice notes on my Blackberry listening to all the song/guitar ideas I have recorded over the last year looking for gems...
you're gonna have to let me know when I finally do
priceless RT : I am more embarrassed of Kane wearing white jeans at a bar then passing out at one. Sorry Kane.
I'm worried about Obama's tearing apart the Constitution, the WHOLE of the GOP. They ALL SUCK!
It's a dirty game who can you trust ?
Hey man is there any way I could talk to your mom about possibly doing a % night for Riley DM at Monical's? Thanks
hahah ikr? :) im really bored right now in class
Find your passion, do it, never settle for less.......
Thanks for the follow. Glad to discover you- we all need more laughter
wow #KobeBryant just swung and nailed a KF from #DEnver ....
Excited to see on twitter! I love that shop!
Off to school! Ttyl
“In an organization, a meeting is an obligation. In a movement, a meeting is an opportunity.”
sometimes the love u want might not be the love u need!!
Thanks ! Great feedback. Looking forward to the fall.
It's been fun chatting with you guys tonight! I'm gonna watch some #StarTrek Voyager on #Netflix tonight! Have a good night!! xoxo ~Susie
": I think my Valentines Day dinner for the last 3 years has been tequila." And I like it that way ;)
what are you referring to? That over won
be goin through some things lbs
Just had a burger on opening night at shake shack next door to DCTNG. Sensational! I shall be back.
I really wishes Rage Against the Machine were fiercely libertarian instead of communists.
This special is our favorite. $1.50 Mexican beer. Bottles or Draft. You can't beat that!!!
the dead start walking again tonight. i hope they start walking at least, versus sitting around crying and whining. GO zombies! Action!
Hrm. that sounds wildly inaccurate, but I'll take it!
I just bought a new pair of Newton running shoes!! They are fabulous--and hopefully worth every penny!
My hair right now -____-
GREAT! Show up at Guest Relations in the IU Health Entry Pavilion of by 6:15pm?
Soundtrack this week: brownswood basement all vinyl. Thankful for crate diggers.
chocolate with sprinkles always makes my day! yummy!
excuse me?
Spontaneous tasting at Abacela
omg who is going?!!
I need to stop watching all these sappy love movies.! Lol
Wondering how much the American Farm Bureau and its many subsidiaries have spent lobbying Congress against child safety rules
Personality humor smile <3
Showers will come to an end this morning with partly cloudy skies this afternoon.
That was a pretty bloated treatise on the genre that used a lot of 10 cent words to make the reviewer feel smart and us dumb
ews! Haha hey im tired im going 2 bed. Night
Surrender tonight..... should be able to hook up you and your crew.
About twenty-five percent of the population sneeze when they are exposed to light.
its your fault the Heat lost to Dallas last year
RT : There is a whole generation of football players who wanted to wear 55 because of Junior Seau.
Tomorrow starts a new day and a great time to explore more #opened resources - which is why you should check out #theCN!...
Winning isn't everything--but wanting to win is.Vince Lombardi
Why are the #walkerbots all on #wiunion #WIrecall saying #DNC took our money? Who in #WI has donated outside #wipolitics this last yr?
tweet me !
Retweet this if you miss summer
thanks again! hope you're having a great new year.
The age someone decides to stop spiking the front of their hair says a lot about that person
werd. RT : Im tired of the artist vs. administrator. We both care a/b the same thing
morning Auz10! How are you doing? (:
Happy Easter Sunday from yours truly at Bracken Library.
Thanks for the RT agreed on the chimichangas from allsups, you should nominate them
Mark Iacona of the Rochester Jazz Festival joins Bob Brenna & Shelly Boyce on Valentine's Day for the Brenna Law forum, 8 am on WHAM 1180
Haha. That actually would be appropriate.
awhh stay strong austin. us mahomies are here for you <3
Another unexpected power outage. This time it was right in the middle of me watching the XFactor in my house >_>
I'm going to make my mom take me to FIRST tour. <3. :)))))
With so much on my mind, i'm becoming an insomniac
follow me and I will stop bugging you
And i getta dye my huurr c:
how could I have forgotten that 15 yrs ago last month was the 1st PPV of #ECW ?
ANYONE KNOW HOW TO stop a dog from shedding
Saved by BONUS POINTS!!!
yea we ridin dirty but tha whip clean
she Jess is Jordan's sis :) & 16 :)
341 pages of pure Mermaid Fantasy check it out at NaLee2010.com or Amazon.com look for NaLee by Erin Sankey
Walking Dead
I agree on the unis...I hope they wear white today & look like a bb team & not night shift parking attendants
It's raining. It's pouring. I wish I was snoring.
I was your poopy phone, then your poopy internet connection. Try again tonight?
Ah spider in my car while driving!
la gettin it right now
I guess I completly missed the rain. Oh well.
I watch 20 mins of biggest loser while getting pumped to hit the gym!
no ones talk to me here
Be proud of who you are.
Can't believe it's time for the last class of the semester!
Can't wait to see the new concept #Ciel in person-I NEED one!
lol I frickin hate & love you !!! ❤ but I'm goin shopping Sunday ! But dinner & movies sounds god 😘😘
Yes let's! I will be in the office on Wednesday, how about you?
wow that's harsh. Do you know why?
HolySh*t I forgot how good the bottom of a Marino's chocolate ices was! Straight up #best surprise ever. My #weekend has begun. :)
ok! Pick a number! Well I don't want to confuse confidence with cockiness. So I never really thought about it!:p
she murmured something...& for a moment he hated her because she could sleep so peacefully, so far away from him, dreaming different dreams.
re:Dreamy New Kirk: screw that, I'm all about Winona Ryder playing Spock's MILF-mom. What a cougar!
HAPPY BIRTHDAY! C;
80 degrees out ... I'm cool with this .
"Here I come to save the day! Here I come to save the day!"
Thank you! Yes, it sure is wonderful! I've got to get to bed now! I'm fading fast! Goodnight & chat soon!!
i direct messaged it to you ! 😃
sometime I do. How's that back hair? Lmao
Jimmy Herring is just more proof that God loves us!
whaaa?? speak english
Found out today that #michaelcrichton passed away in 2008. Don't know what I was doing that year, but will miss one of my favorite authors!
You can get everything in life you want if you will just help enough other people get what they want
oh, so pumped. I opened the book and literally had no idea what I was even looking at...
RT : Jesus gave us the incomparable privilege of calling God "Father." -R.C. Sproul
what's a "yes" man in your eyes?
Finna eat some pineapples . .
Just confirmed 2 panelists for my presentation proposal for this year's AMIA conference!
I pray God may preserve your health and life many years
Time for a haircut, house viewing, lunch then a House marathon. A quiet weekend at last.
Going to see she is the under study for #understudyrunthrough cant wait to see it!
yup!! Do it!! :) didn't make it to kickboxing but at gym now 🏃
good night yall guys
HAPPY ST. PADDY'S DAY! Get down with the wknd special: the REUBEN OMLET! Stuffed w/ kraut and fresh Corned Beef! Served w/ Potatoes O'Brien!
Finally got to sleep in for once :).
You are going to have to fight me for her. :) I'm a black belt.
I can try but I can't make that promise, besides I enjoy our "debates" it gives me a chance to prove my dominance
RT : Tweets! We dance 5th tomorrow. Vote Vote Vote
At lunch with
i have a dance recital tonight! Wish me luck??(:
Jay-Z designed the new Nets logo just like Al Gore invented the internet....
FF these awesome tweeters
Join a Scientific Investigation of the On July 2 Space is VERY limited. Call Monica 414/218-2202 about joining P.A.S.T
Hello Jon, I'm looking for a new rehearsal space in Brooklyn. Do you know of anything?
I was being generous. :-)
ok, I retract the "mean" face title. It is now my "serious" face:)
Other languages look like gibberish to me lol.
Are you a local attending #2011ASA? Come back soon to discuss public history, preservation and community development on Dec 2
RT In reply: not at Aspen Ideas Festival. Not invited. Had idea in 2006. Had children thereafter, not enough sleep for idea-
IM HERE
oakland ca now Riot cops stand off with flowers being placed at their feet by protests 1 min they will use chemical agents
While there's life, there's hope. ~ Marcus Tullius Cicero
#WatchCougarTown at 8:30 ABC! You won't regret it!!!
What is your favorite recipe for hot chocolate these days? I am trying to perfect my recipe.
I need this guy to hurry up -.-
no i died xD lol how are you wifey?
The End
is 50 shades better or worse than the avg romance novel. How (or) is it different?
"the good spot" is going to be a crazy tonight at 105 riv nyc!
Damn! Give Molly a chance a normal hood free life!
JOE'S CRAB SHACK (Seafood Rest., Bar & Music) FRIDAY'S 6:00 - 9:00 pm 1991 N. Rainbow Blvd @ Lake Mead Las Vegas, NV 89108
you wanna make sure you're at analog bar downtown Nov 28 to see us play the I dustry night?
finished every tax thing ever. federal. montana. seattle. on this pace, he'll finish his next 1040 before 2012 is over. hear that ?
Tortured artist.
hi chris
If you stuck with our advice last week, you'll be eating an awesome turkey tomorrow!!!
Yay! They've finally got the FULL #TheVoice audition online for ! Just skim down to the bottom. Way to rock it, Brian!
pitch by my doorstep. Singin' sweet songs. Of melodies pure and true. Saying'------
. on cat gravity: Cats have higher-than-normal gravity, which explains why you are immobilized if they lie on top of you.
It's a shame that one can't talk about Joe Frazier without talking about Muhammad Ali and suggesting that Frazier was somehow defined by Ali
The beer is still in the frig. Some night soon it will be tried!
Is beyond annoyed.
Moving #gameofthrones season 1 to the top of my netflix queue so I can finally talk to about it!
Why do we only have happy birthdays & not happy deathdays? On the anniversary of a love ones death we should wish them a happy deathday.
meh, it is a good one!
indeed bro. I'm hyped. And when we goin to Rubicons?
Hey there! We're just launching this week, and only available in So-Cal right now. But we hope to have online retailers soon!
#foursquare seems to be tweeting more than I am these days.
Wish Fox would show more baseball Saturdays. My horse trailer's stuck in the mud again and I don't know which boner pill will help.
Didn't get the pot of gold? Get a bowl of awesome soup! We have Chicken Dumpling, Broc Cheddar, Squash w/ Roasted Red Pepper & French Onion!
yay im now an #Ulta trainer! Pretty excited :)
Don't you know about the team, Ayee?
Watching Casino Royale with Daniel Craig. Luv James bond movies. 🔫
got a whole lot of work to do and get caught up on.
I almost forgot it was Friday
I miss seeing all of you wrestling.
Moms making me take twitter off my phone because it uses "to many texts". Who cares!
Okay ur a goon but what's a goon to a goblin?
"NEVER-LAND!"
1st mtg w/new tutee tonight - a medical student from Brazil, doing research in Boston. He's awesome! LOVE tutoring!
How do you feel about gay Christians?
There is a light at the end of the tunnel, even when you can't see it, or even see the tunnel.
Shoutout Thanks for sharing our stuff! We appreciate it =)
Having the weather on my phone set for Stratford Ontario Canada.
What are the top three music cities in the US?
Finally watched #MadMen. Whoa mama.
sweet gallows, bro!
mad pages in '94
i still don't get why we aren't dating.. I like you, You like me… but its just distance… :(
Ryan seems to have kicked it up a notch on the new demo tracks. That sounds like an oxymoron, but it's true!
RT : Meetings should be no more than seven minutes. Period. <- my boss. Oh yeah, we are hiring. Get in touch with me.
Good friends stick around because god says you'll need them later in life.
“: needs to HUSH & i can't help it , i love fruit !!!!” yeah I seen that lmao !
Hello weezy, welcome home.
John and Jean Comaroff leave Chicago for Harvard
Good morning back at you!
Can I have a photo pass for tomorrow's show in Dallas?
Ready for our #adaptivechat? and , head of digital , will be taking your questions in just a few minutes.
Maybe make a few calls, see if you can get them to postpone it until fall. Never know.
Finally remembered how to log on to twitter!! Yeah me!
RT Kindness, I've discovered, is everything in life. - Isaac Bashevis Singer
hit up the cow with a link after you write it. We love to have a laugh!
But #SouthPark is making me feel better. :)
The perks of working at a spa....I love it!!
Q5: UFC is always pushing into new territory w/ SM. Thoughts on this?
now, not only does the construction wake me up every morning at 7am, but on saturday mornings too?
you two are something
Micro radish pesto
Whoever says it FUCK YOU !
Christmas baking has begun!
according to game center, a little high,
Whatever happens with us, the way we deal with it, determines the success & happiness derived from it
Tonight it's going down! Can't wait to test the new amps out
safe travels back to Minnesota RT : great meeting you guys today!
leaders own their weaknesses and their failures.
haha ^^ I like u all
Well, I wanted to do something revolutionary!
he's just the guy im lookin for :)
SEE YOU AT BAMBOOZLE
Whenever I feel like it fool..!! LOL. Just kiddin... Probly tomorrow. Im in big time chill mode watchin the game right now
Really cheap if you can find a movie you want to watch w/ the new interface. Hate.
thanks and after 3 rounds, he's in 2nd to last place. :-/ happy st. patrick's day.
Popcorn chicken and potato wedges from KFC... M
I guess popcorn is whole grain carbs, right? Fuel for my upcoming 1000 yard lap swim ce soir . . . mon dieu
Thx! RT : I talked to the manager at Starbucks.... Left you a message through your website :) Have a great day!
Habitat for Humanity's last build day is this Saturday, November 5. Come out and join the fun! Signs up are in UC Rm 316. RT RT
PUMPED that E3 kicks off in a few hours!! If this rumored star wars kinect game impresses me, I may have to buy a 360
why are some gay guys soo cute? D:
please keep tweeting.
What the fukk is going on here??
Game 3 in Philadelphia #Bulls vs
they are so good live! You have to go with us!
I'm at work right now “: if you're working on thanksgiving... you must be a small business owner. #justthewayitis”
14 years ago, I traded for a single A hitter named Carlos Beltran with KidMikey. John Hunt actually wrote about our deal in BW weekly.
- of course! You're doing a great job.
I'm moving back to Tampa in a month!!! I see you are directing a movie?
Hey look. A new technology genius!
New Classy Lady following Me!!!
Love how Tony just pulled a Ron Burgandy!!!
@ Natl Archives - in line to see the Decl of Indep, the Constitution & Bill of Rights. What better way to celebrate 4th of July weekend?
hey luke we got beard over here. #wewantlaidbacknow can u come to miami
we will get it to a bookstore in LAG soon
If this doesn't work out(which I don't even like saying) then. It doesn't.. But at least I can say .. I gave it MY ALL!.
Why do I get shitface drunk just before the greatest racing day of the year? ?
in NY? What is he seeing?
R Kelly got my son saying I wanna share my love, share my love. Let's populate
*phone buzzes* jump over couch, knock stuff over, fight invisible ninjas all to find out that txt is from that person u hate
RT : Tip: Be assertive, not aggressive...there's a difference. #Success #attitude RT
#Packer Pride
ah understand now!
A random thought: wouldn't it be funny if turned out to really be ?
My host family wonders why their dog is so fat, yet they keep feeding her animal crackers every 15 minutes
Thank's for the Retweet!
well 7.5 on norm hard the. About 8ish when super hard haha
I haven't been to the Mall of America in quite a while myself. Used to go there all the time when I was a teenage
Great. Let a buddy borrow my iPad for a bit, and he uses my Facebook account to "poke" a bunch of people.
ahh >.< Well if anything we can talk here or text
Really excited to share some new covers tomorrow night!
Come Join the band tonight for our show @ the new deuces lounge (formely Outback Lodge)...Show starts @ 9pm - All Ages.
excellent shirt
Oh man. Why have I not been watching "Bob's Burgers"? Haha!!
I really cannot wait for #AngelsAndGentlemen! I can't wait to see what other songs you covered. Excited for
Just acquired a portable numark turntable, thanks Akil!! now I can actually play the small collection of vinyl I own...yayurr!!
Leff: "The environment is The Other of economic rationality."
if you stand in my way im gonna find a way through you
Commit to making at least one person happy today by giving them attention, appreciation, and affection. ~ Deepak Chopra
Anthony Weiner: 'Why the F*ck Am I Not on MSNBC?!' - New York Magazine
cool! How are you??
bucks killin' right now
Thanks! It should work now. If u r on a mac and have issues, let me know!
what was UK's record in 1952-53 ?
Jimmy Howard has allowed 2 goals on 7 shots now today. USA's Save Percentage for the tournament has to be in the bottom half now.
25% of search results for world's 20 largest brands are links to user-gen content (Source: Forrester; cited in Loni Stark preso).
so great, right! 😄
Joan Didion~ To have that sense of ones intrinsic worth... is potentially to have everything...
Going to skate tomorrow with matthew O: hopefully neither of us break somethingg
Hey it's BK, What is your favorite gangster flick? The movie-The Godfather premiered on this day 1972. 40 years ago!
I took the Clarisonic challenge and LOVED it! What a great bday present from Vogue and I have one word to say: EXFOLIATION. Lovin' it!
I loved watching Smokin' Joe Frazier fight, but he's a prime example of why I wouldn't actually object if boxing were outlawed.
Im Finna Go Outside
Been off my routine. Apologies for not posting daily HBDs on FB, replying in a timely manner to vm/email; new life blessings adjustment mode
I'll add to the chorus. Great stuff, especially last couple of weeks. A necessary dose of perspective, passion & intelligence.
i love them all!!!!!
is ushering in Web 3.0 at
Wait, facebook.com isn't a porn site?.
“: #WeLoveLilKim is trending? Who's we? Not ME.!!!” weeeaaakkk 
but again. give it a test run on new hardware. see what you think. my client chose iOS mainly for security reasons and more native
Gas or Ass! :D
Love when that happens, BUT it's rare!! RT Hasnt been one bad song yet on this pandora station ...... :)
Sounds like Kevin Federline is back in the dating game.
I feel bad for people in denial :p
Winning games is so last season. Win, lose or draw, the Braves are still the most fun in the NL.
i find it hilarious, ridiculous, that gmail defaults to categorize emails as "home" email addresses. i always change them to "personal".
#earthquake I knew it! Woke me up too.
ok I'll try
On a movie marathon today cause I'm off. Change Up. 30 min or Less. Detective Dee and Fright Night
I need you to squats down like your underwears is done for but you might save the jeans
watching Good Luck Charlie Make Room for Baby(: beyond excited i heart on demand!
Trusses have arrived...raise the roof!
Yessir happy to have Kemoeatu back! He was one of my favorite Ravens back in the day. Try running on him and Ngata...
Today Barack Obama proved he is a president for the 21st Century
I enjoyed the oscars even though I felt Mickey Rourke got robbed.
RT : Hey there ! Sure can't wait to see you at this year!!!
Good morning! Today we are at the AARC 9th Annual Roundtable: Building Civil Society After the Arab Spring- Progress, Challenges, Needs
Bitches who have met Justin a billion times and constantly brag. Im going 2 meet him on my wedding day and you hoes aint invited. IN YO FACE
Thank you! You are the BEST! Happy Anniversary.
You are so welcome.
If I don't pick up my phone it's because the battery is dead, not me.
Rick Ross be barking. Tyga got a sore throat. Lil Wayne's lighter is broke. Wiz Khalifa thinks everything is funny.
A band with a song called "Sex Foot" can't be all bad.
stop twatching me though 🐒
Coming soon! RT : Citation Needed
Oh...my bad. Thanks for setting me straight. I blame Indiana...and Tom Crean.
i need food so bad :(
Did I mention that we r giving away gift certificates 2 Roy's, Carmelo's, Moonshine and other places for participating in the cell phone dr?
Also odd that you're tweet while eating crawfish which involves the same skill draw something involves. This is BULLSHIT!!!!!
thank you!
Dr.Spivak's public #beekeeping classes are hugely popular (:
#FF literary lions
Oh the days! I MISS! Sweet memories, indeed. Now she's practicing driving & P + I are in the backseat feeling out of control!
Monster and eggos for breakfast.
dat bitch crazy
thanks Jen-a lot of love for the new pic
thanks again for the shoutout man!
the guitar player hunt continues.hope we get this over with soon.
people are fucking retarted and like to let people tell them what do to
God I can't wait until turns 18 and shows the world whose boss!!
I love him. He's a Dalaric shipper at heart. ;)
If you sleeping right now...... you a bitch!!!! (sorry lala)
App download is free - but requires a subscription purchase to use full solution. See website.
God is good
The more you read and observe about this Politics thing, you got to admit that each party is worse than the other. - Will Rogers, 1924
Really don't care anymore
follow me? ive been trying for months<3
I really wanna go see #TheLuckyOne again
GAB deciding this morning to certify recall elections.
Watching the flurries start to come down
I'm really excited for #DancingWithTheStars!
is the SHIT! and team kicks ASS!!
Come meet Founding Director and learn about her plans for the Harrington School! Thursday Alumni Center 4pm
Cracked my iPhone
Every day is earth day!
omgg the shit I just seen.
Hi JG Bst 2 u FREE E-BOOK Award Winning novel GRAY RAINBOW JOURNEY Limited time offer Contact
#Truth! #BetheGreaterYou RT Welcome challenge. Embrace & overcome hardship. You become more by doing so.
Last day of #Passion2012! It's been phenomenal!
hanging out with you guys next week, ihave too.(:
it's good to be reminded of that. It helps keep your spirit alive and feisty ;) xx
twitter b moving too fast fa me lol
I been growin oranges all my life
I sure would love that signed vinyl ;) hint hint wink wink
Try putting log cabin maple pancake syrup on hot corn on the cob with melted butter....pretty damn good!
99% of people in this world are stupid, luckily I`m in the other 2%
USC falls to the Huskies!!!!!
Haha that good! Glad to hear it was great<3 when willyou see Austin again?
Hello NURSE!
When wearing something complex, lighten it up with solid colors. Details should accentuate an outfit, not crowd it.
7 more minutes to vote for as much as possible.. Everybody text the word vote to 5703!
Hate Im gone miss everything going down at Uptown Comedy Corner this weekend except for Sunday. Lotta big things going down
My 3 Words - Life in Balance!
Time for some Hey Arnold!
Looking forward to the Preakness Horse Races this weekend! Come by to help celebrate!
"Don't catch me at the wrong time OR YOU WILL FEEL MY WRATH"<3
I'm back at tonight at 9. And today I'm extra punctual
Are you interested in learning more about PEMF in physical therapy & pain management? Let's connect.
yes, it really works nicely. :-)
I retweet too much.
need some more bangers sent ASAP your gonna be like the executive producer on my whole mixtape almost haha pizza to is done
lol. Gotta love that auto correct!
June 29. and I will be there at the Clevelander.
Finally back home!!!!!
A preposition is something you should not end a sentence with.
Defense for 8 seconds... Thats all I'm asking for #LetsGoPacers!!!!
I say you + me + hang out ASAP!
I know that I don't know better than that, as you & & friends blew me off while in PDX last yr...
VentriPoint Launches Clinical Trial in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) With Top Pulmonary Hypertension Centres ...
b/c im askinn ! now answer the question !
Sometimes that's hard to do but if you want it, you have to keep pushing for it!
I know I just met you and this might sound crazy but here's my number so call me mabey ;)
Competition today<3
What is one of your marketing goals for this year?
My aunt lives out there, say for me!
Ahh, what could be nicer than fresh air and sunshine flowing thru my house....
Hey it might be time to take some of your cynical BS it shove it where the sun don't shine. Stop hatin on
#interviewtip DGE having quality references ready is key even if you dont include them on ur resume, have them ready 2 go if asked 4 them.
RT : Not just when people are handing out kitschy representations of our cultures. Viva Mexico, cabrones.
Don't be afraid of growing stronger. Only be afraid of standing still.
You preach the love of God yet you condemn others to hell, that's not love
Hope Brodus slips & busts his ass on tear puddle!
Awesome, bro!!!
HAHHAH POOR SLEPPY MRS. HENDERSON HAH IS A STORY CALLED EYE OF THE STORM 20 CHAPTERS
US immigration has less answers than the dmv! But.....at least they are pleasant. !
Is it really a secret about who the main character is in the ChristMas story?
I never seem to fail, when it comes to neglecting twitter. #I'mBackHoes
cool i just got back from eating
Full day of strategic planning. Was awesome. RT Arrived in #Charlotte, ready to facilitate a good retreat. Should be fun
Sharing the VP story to explain why corporations still hide the truth about their choices & don't look back.
Thanks for your patience giveaway winners. All new designs will be coming your way! Thanks for your continued support!
Not what I meant!
Nice! I still need to book my ticket but it'll probably be tuesday-thursday. I'll keep you posted!
#SignsAFightBout2Breakout Whhen you know that your hearst been pounding too long and then shit
#HEATPlayoffs: has a lower abdominal strain. He will not return."
I get that age thingy all the time, by the way. It's more of no way you are not..let me see some id. lol
I went to the rest room too
Thx for mentions/RTs/FFs! Have a great week!
love your background brosky bro
delivering to most of you this eve to avoid the big storm tomorrow, Seattle!
so glad you like this oldie! I may have to break it out and play it the next show you're at!! :)
It is incredible that you still own the rights to 'Orange Soda.' TO GOD BE THE GLORY!!! :)
Derek Fisher: Through the Years
song are so powerfull
Skeet skeet skeet watergun.
Everything's better with you.The music sounds better with you <3
I see your boy Trent going to Cleveland...
Is it Friday yet? Just checking.
I'm glad it's Wednesday because I can write consistently for the rest of the week & then rest guilt free on the weekend. Hallelujah.
": how to make a girl scream by saying 4 words: "Hi, I'm Austin Mahone."
got you
Sad part about the whole situation is that's probably somebody's father. Haha
Awesome...PERFECT day for the Chev's. Now go beat the Evil Empire! HMD to Trac too
Boyfriend cover. <3
what in THE HELL is Katy Perry wearing????
Great win Beavers! Can't wait to see you go all the way again!
shawty u my e'rrythang u all i ever wanted😘 #BestIEverHad ❤
A Chicken Caesar Salad at 5am? Why not?
FOLLOW THEY ALSO PRINTING THE NEW LINE OF CLOTHING WE ARE LAUNCHING NEXT YEAR We So Fresh Clothing Co. Spring 2012 stay tuned
ayyyy! Lol what are your birthday plans?
thanks!! I am! Never stop! :)
Being at home I find that I have less time to tweet than on the road. I guess that is what 2 kids and a wife does: keeps you occupied.
It's time
What a blessing you are to so many.
lmaooo, your right
Can someone help CP3 when he trapped.
delighting in the fact that a movie called "Titanic 2" is now available on Netflix Watch Instantly
all the team is in NYC! it was great to see them today and get some face time for 2012 planning!
you better come to class Thursday! It'll be our last one together! :(
Let's go Maryland!!
Some days I can't believe how lucky I am to have such an amazing kid. It may just be the two of us, but that just makes our bond stronger.
cool makeup work !
Want to get started working at an ad agency? We've got a job for you. DM me now.
RUDE.RUDE.RUDE.
June 2nd. Birthday celebrations. Stay posted.
#nowplaying - "T.G.I.F" by (wishing it was Friday!!)
Thanks, how are you doing?
billboard connection
I'd love to know the kind of deal Cruz made to get Bravo...I'll bet it's not that great. He left because of Vermes. Bank it.
7 GIFTS FOR THE WEIGHT CONSCIOUS. Shopping for a friend who’s watching the scale? Here’s a list of gifts that will please any dieter – and…
it's goin down tomorrow
Be nice to everyone new you meet, you never know what challenges they might be facing.
Thank you, thank you, thank you for updating the syncing. I see my reading plan from my mac on the iPad for the first time this year!
We are now available in Attach- Cumberland and Perimeter mall
RT : Really great talk on "how technology is helping the world" - thanks to and Nico Preston
11 Make A Wish - A world in peace :)
and he wouldve went to the camp/college you go to before you go pro but his dad was dying so he had to help work
would you guys mind if we featured you on our website? :)
KEEP CALM AND LOVE CODY <3
“If you’ll not settle for anything less than your best, you will be amazed at what you can accomplish in your lives.” - Vince Lombardi
Time to take care of shit now
of course then espn would have to change their cover story lol
What the hell is Pepsi next
Beer is the cure to a bad cough
Heading to office late Sunday afternoon. #tshirtstoprint & #cdstomake. #goodproblem to have. Thankful for all the CD/DVD & t-shirt printing
Can't wait to join the team! RT : Happy to have in the office tomorrow. Nice to have her help.
Fingers: sprained little finger
well now that you threw in the #FOG hug.. that's a different story.... hm. wait.. still nope :)
West LA to Sherman Oaks in 1.5 hours. 10 miles. 1.5. Now I understand why audio books exist.
Hurt my leg running home with #oomf yesterday
LBJ is a more rounded Bernard King or Dominique Wilkins . . . he can fill up a stat sheet as well as if not better than anyone, but he ...
it was awesome meeting you at Sams party! Have a wonderful day lady :-)
Much respect for that Sarah Palin tweet....speak free or hold that tongue...
Yup! that's right! Chopper's Sports Grill is on Twitter
Babe calls me a hater cuz I still made him buy me sumthing lol I'm not a mother......ah well
I love Annie too. I laughed early on but it just never evolved beyond the single gag stage for me. I wish it were better ;)
HARVARD SQ: We have Strawberry Shortcake and Vanilla-Cinnamon flavors!
Infrastructure upgrades are continuing! Feel free to contact us through our home page to find out how we can serve you!
Feeling like no one likes me or wants me around :( thanx I guess il stay at home for the rest of my life because no one will hang out w/me
Not enough Santorum-time for you? :-)
X'in my next class
why u always so mean An mad all the time?
Botox, Lifestyle Lift, or PhotoShop.... Decisions, decisions....
Agreed! RT : Props to Braden Holtby. What a run!
we're in the beginning stages of a planning a conference on the Federalist Party for Oct. 2013. Will keep you updated.
Ah nation loves you
pretty ok day today :p
YouTube. My usernames xxxmalice
practice today :D
Random act of kindness today: girl in front of me at Tartine covered my tab. Sweet start to July!
I'd be prouder if you'd submitted a patch. But it's better than nothing I guess
Great meeting with Opened my eyes.
$DNAD is strong... i attribute that to a great shareholder group!
I wonder why.
Yes I do fit into a youth 3.5 nike soccer cleat,& yes if it wasn't a neon gatorade yellow I would have bought them.
#cfaleadercast Leadership is idiosyncratic, but most leadership development is formulaic. Marcus Buckingham
you gonna get all 5 i think i'm just gonna get 2 for now, i'm poor, lol
My aunt is telling my niece gay isn't okay unless it's on tv. Nice.
I kill it and people giving a response lets me know I did thank u
Joc need to hurry up. I want sum McDonald's.
they dont believe in #evolution down here. What kind of fun are you really expecting?
We were clearly unprepared for the response following the Competition & Articles. Our website was shut down! Never fear. IT is on it!
Nasty weather outside for Texas, but it'll change. Lots of housekeeping before the re-immersion into the dark abyss of coding. Sweet abyss.
BItch say she dont like dark niggas
Life doesn't copy art, it imitates bad tv.
RT : give it up , there's gonna be a #thunderstorm all over that Lake show.
Alien Encounters: Speculative and Imaginative Fiction by Writers of Color Thursday, September 2, 2010 at 6:30pm...www.afpls.org/aarl
-AKA- Young Blake. I just finished listening to 'Audio Thoughts Vol.' U SPIT FIRE MY BOY. KEEP IT MOVIN & GOD BLESS! :-)
I'll be there running the other agent tonight. I hope I get to see you!
Might be placebo but the gun seemed to run better today with
I always said if I got 100 followers I would step it up
Most excellent. Thank you.
i clicked my mouse over 10,000 times today
You're welcome.
Over 800lbs of weight loss in the room tonight!! It's great to see people getting healthy
TGIF! What's everyone up to this weekend?
Mascara is the key to gorgeous, glam eyes! One way to get the most of it is to add some curl! It will make your eyes look wider.
you are so incredibly beautiful Cherl please follow me :)
Number game!! Tweet me or DM me numbers!! (:
Where is the party at?
thanks for your help (:
RT Our blog's 1 year anniversary is tommorrow. Can we get a retweet?
Good morning all!! Have a great Monday!!
fuck first class , I'm in the cock Pitt.
RT this if you love your #Mother! Happy Mother's Day!
You keep me from feeling lonely when I'm alone.
And I thought you were about to make some progress in becoming less and less of my most ratchet friend.
Any change, even a change for the better, is always accompanied by drawbacks and discomforts. - Arnold Bennett
Court rules ban on same sex marriage in California is unconstitutional. Todd Hicks TMJ4
Confirmation bias=new H1N1. affects cons & dems.Unlike H1N1'fear is very real, no antidote or awareness.
Happy Weekend! Feel free to Download my song "Someday Soon" at www.myspace.com/rachelmargaretmusic. xoxo Rachel
Sunday night shout out to some writers & editors. Hope it's a great week!
release your album on your jersey # Jan 5
omfg, I want pizza now.
Twitter is basically just you having a conversation with yourself hoping that someone else will join in
pretty please open a milkshake city in australia?! my parents won't bring me to england for a 1D shake!
he is really gross.....
let's all chill again soon
Happy Mothers Day! ;D Great day so far, went to church and bought new shoes, now going out to lunch soon! : D
Peace grits and lotsa snaps yalllllllllll
Orange juice + box of tissues + soup = sick in bed supplies.
goodbye, I love you.
Clutter means anything that stands between you & the vision you have for your best life, it’s so much more than just the stuff. Peter Walsh
Loving the fast WiFi connection at home!! No hotel log-ins, just right online. Nothing but gratitude right now.
Kiki magazine is the real deal. GREAT mag for girls w/ fun AND substance. my lib subscribed 2 yrs ago. They have a booth.
sounds good. I will eat everything in sight D: cause I'm a monster.
Waking up early is amazing!
i need to know if you have feelings for her :p but i can't ask you because i know you will say no no matter what :'c
This week was too crazy to be classified as good or bad, and what just happened is total confirmation of that.
That guy is flaming.
Much better. But my dual Xeon workstation is about 3-4 years old compare to i7 which is 6 months old and better specs.
Morning Rockstars! > Hope is the dream of a man awake. - French Proverb
hey! follow back?
Beach Boy Rad is a Political Atheist and all of you 99% of you are not.
are you gonna come in!? o have a new idea or something of the sort lol! its aneed to know asap thing! lol
great! Looking forward to starting! Thanks :-)
OMG!!! I can't even look at that!!! I feel like I'm going to throw up, that's SICK! I WANT that child!!!
All over, it just depends on what I have to do next.
Thanks honey bun!
shuttle bus on the track?
Great rates are just a phone call away 314.845.0363
I'm about to stab my own eyes out from boredom.
yea you are?!
so instead of taking up a vote on #VAWA, is holding a vote right now on allowing DC to use cap grounds for soapbox derby.
I'd consider it if it weren't for the kids....
Seal Team 6 rocks! Congrats on a mission well done...but definitely not over!
No problem!
Other arts/culture orgs: Do you have any methods or insights to share on the side? Not scientific, but always helpful to hear.
lol I'm taking a break for a while in Chicago :) there's so much to explore here!
I made my mom a painting. Posting it later
If you get the wink... Lets just say your in the money.
Merry Christmas and New Year from Tax Brandywine! 4 more days until the Welcome Home EP release show!
I don't have a short temper, I just have a quick reaction to bullsh!t.
I don't get you
always.. I want a baby at least once a week
For it is by grace you have been saved, through faith-and this not from yourselves, it is the gift of God. -Eph 2:8 --
Hahaha. Yes. Thought would be fun to play around with one for her, but as soon as I made it, it wasn't as great as expected. Lol
Assuming without positively knowing #WhyDoPeopleDoThis"
uh yes i have a stripper song, I have a few ... For behind closed doors with that special someone lol
Super Excited about TONITE - - Huge #ShoutOut & Coming thru Tonight
I'll be watching from Boston, good luck !
The Secretary of the Navy announced that one of the two new Freedom-class littoral ships being built in WI will be named the USS Milwaukee!!
So quiet in Fenway I just heard someone's IPhone get a text message on the NESN broadcast.
Today: Day 6 of the #phametour - sorry to cancel 1st tour stop due to virus outbreak at senior ctr; we'll be at Rose Villa at 1:30 pm!
Need more moments like these..with sun and time with my journal...
remembered another link. The list of authors who Skype for free
If u need something or wanna talk just DM me!!!:)
So by Briton, do they mean the guys who slaughtered folks in the name of God during the crusades? Could I recommend the "Crosses"?
he keeps tryin to talk to her it's so annoying
Hey girl! Do u know if they are having casting in LA again this May? Nothin is posted
Just get a donkey RT : Fox Sports exec Eric Shanks says likely soccer fans will see Piers Morgan again on its pregame show.
We're going to announce our grand prize winner in 10 minutes! That person will win an #MomInspired Gift Bag with iPad!
How are we treating others in out life as we work to achieve our championship in the game of life
I just looked at a shot and said "I don't need to take that"...I'm turning into an amateur drinker.
eating ice cream! jus melted a block of chocolate in the microwave then pour it all over my ice cream my favorite yummy!
Gotta love watching Family Guy
My husband is making me watch this mess on tv...mess=lakers...LOL
oh i know. jeff has a problem cena dont
"fun, fun, fun, fun, lookin forward to the weekend"
Check out the diamond dezign ideas promotions on the diamond networ!
My best friend is donating warehouse space for the Diaper Bank. My warehouse space is EMPTY & we needs DIAPER donation's to fill it!
So, those Cleveland Occupy bombers are potential friend/mentors of the Democrats 2024 presidential candidate.
Rainy day
Giving thanks today to Friends of Fondren for endowments & gifts : much appreciated!
Adele is a beautiful woman but not because she can sing her ass off but because her personalty and her ability to be so humble is astounding
True nobility is in being superior to your previous self.
TIP: When driving down the Pacific Coast of California... DONT STAY IN EUREKA!
that's how I feel about my internet! $75/month for decent speed!
yes an Tamara was right there along with her till now
I've been sitting here for like 3 hours trying to do this damn AP essay, and I've still got nothing. anoihsf(FF(R#BNF(*D#BRUNRFC(*#!!!!!!!!!
#Linsanity takin' over the fourth quarter....again! Go
I need to bring you something but I can't go out. What would you like me to draw for you?
bells black note stout
Let's start this Holiday season right. Times have changed, Americans struggle everyday to keep their jobs, pay bills and put food on the ta…
LOVED it. you guys did amazing as usual:)
OPTR PUTS could make some nice coin.
Sell an experience, not a product.
'Enjoy an Awesome & HAPPY HALLOWEEN Everyone*...Remember; The Price of to much Halloween Candy is...'The Dentist', * Make it Chocolate !
Sorry we are not streaming any video or audio
Lol, the artist finished the last person at 7 this morn
“: I hate being corrected about the name of the size of my 16 ounce drink !” Ha!
Easter bunny spotted in Reading, PA. Hatfield and Berks searching urgently to find, grind and scrapple-fy him.
Thank you for all the kind words about Goin' Rogue Song and Video don't forget to tune into Bill Cunningham on Jan 29 to hopefully cheer it
- C'mon to Austin, I have tasks but no rabbits!
I good day to tell merchants why Heartland Payroll is superior to our competition in price and SERVICE!! Gift Cards anyone?
there ya go. always keep the reader wanting to read more
So I was going to start reading #Pandemonium but I seem to somehow lost it in my house ):
Not spam. I am, in fact, a giant, inflatable rat. As giant inflatable rats go, I'm pretty benign. Just not to abusers of labor.
totally satisfied with my treatment from Geico insurance post car-accident last week. :-) 100% covered full-body massage here I come!
hahaha lol :D i love the fact i was born on 4th July lmao
Got the chills outta no where like massive 😖
I want soup.
RT: " you're an IDIOT you totally would've been my date. And the hottest one there. Now I'm #foreveralone"
Haha that's awesome!:) Could I have a hint? But not one that would give it away, I like the surprise.
I'd love to believe in fairy tales but life just doesn't work out that way
been a smooth day..long but smooth,,and smooth is good
WUT. I should probably let the nice people I invited know about that...hm...
Leeland just followed me... :O
Teriyaki Top Sirloin steak with your choice of King Crab, Maine Lobster or Shrimp (grilled or Panko fried) is on the menu tonight!
It's my day off. I'm on set anyway.
You're welcome :)
#IAlwaysWonderIf I ever meant anything to you...
that makes two of us.. Say no more
Great photo! Good luck and thanks for sharing.
bro I are straight cross from usus
still in Vancouver?
Nice piece of driving, that! Surprised they didn't park in handicapped space!!
I'm so sleepy
Visual Studio Connections – learn tech tools, techniques, methodologies of .NET 4.0 Save $200 w/ code DevCon1. Register at bit.ly/fIZjXO
There's something about a swimming pool that makes doing homework less work-y.
My currency is trust - Joe Grimaldi, Mullen
Let's Go TCU!
Oh, it sounds good to me. (:
BFF gift certificates are the perfect presents to give the dog-lovers in your life.
I have so many new FANS!!! *hugs your all * THANK YOU so much #LoveLife #LoveALL *blushes*
Eventful.com will do.....here we go.
Haven't paid attention to the movies, so I only have a vague idea of what she looks like. But I like yours. :)
When he breaks up with his girlfriend , so he doesn't have to get bitched at for talking to me . #fuckyes <3 .
fuk yu I spell it da way I wanna spell it
#Dessert pizza, #breakfast pizza, #dinner pizza... Do you believe #pizza has categories? What's your favorite pizza?
There for him whenever it's needed
Who's stopping in tomorrow night to listen to what Bad Seed is going to mix for us?
*on the phone with mom* friend,"PULL YOUR PANTS UP ALEX!!!" Everytime..
I need a coffee and a new screen for my
Customer panel - discusses its Xactly Incent footprint with 2,500 users live on the platform
freezin my butt off. I cant feel my fingers
Thank you for sharing the news about Fund for Teachers & our teacher grants. Also really liking your tweets on giftedness!
brent roberts- winner of event 1
Excellent to raise; I agree w/ Clare- in my field (bioanthro), small world; "cited-now-blurbing" at times inevitable
aj is duh man
Keep moving on. Turn the page. New day new way.
Thanks Jon! Would love to chat with you and your company!
Omg that's si funny! Hahahaha!!!!!! I wanna do a test to see how long you could last!
We try our hardest :D
what?! Sorry! I must have missed it!
try using songza. It's an app and there's a website. You'll love it. Trust me.
I am actively using two monitors, a tablet, and two smartphones right now. Somehow it feels normal.
I wish made business casual shoes
Follow :D
My brother's name is Colin.
Blue Cards against Marcio Liete and Pat Healy, both teams will play a man down for next 2 minutes
Off of work yaaayyy
Great addition! - RT : Trying our oranges in the boil day which I never had before. A friend also said pineapple is good too.
I was wondering if you would have a meet & greet for Jan 20th Santa Ana show? I love you & wanna met you so bad!
Hoping to connect hs student with "expert" on game design - hoping to motivate this boy as a learner. Advice on how to find "experts?"
FURIOSITY is booking for our 2012 Summer/Fall concerts. Any bands that wanna share the stage, let us know.
Now that A&M is leaving the Big 12 after this season, do you really think we'll keep that game every season?
Sounds good. I'm at the Economic Policy Institute, Directing EARN, a network of 57 state groups in 43 states
I feel like joaning
Good deal. I now have comics in my classroom. Thanks Half Price Books for "treat read" material!
Thanks! You too my man!
got u man tell everyone bruh
Life is too short to spend time with people who suck the happiness out of you...
#LilMan ok I'm actaully workn in a software program that measure room for sound quality lol!
#TOP25CartoonSeriesOfAllTime Jem...I went way back :-) :-) :-)
I saw that yesterday. I've had choc cheese. It tasted like fudge.
Thanks for the fav!
All alone today at lunch...
shitty i wont be gettin this cool greys on saturday
Listening to remastered beatles box set...amazing sound. My week's playlist is set!
Earthquake in New York, baby!
it's on you. I do music every day.
I SO need a big dick up my ass right now! Having that dick attached to a muscular guy to worship, life would be good.
I fucking love you! :-)
Thanks, Megan! cc
“: #imagine Meeting Colton dressed as Batman.”.
Wow! The 13th is NEXT WEEK! Nervous?? I'm glad for u & ur opportunity! @ least u know the area. Any plans 4 ur last Cali days?
LatinExplore&#39;s Combo of Costa Rica Travel Deals and Money Saving Tips
me too! how have *we* not met yet?
yo dude, i heard your dad can fix cars, can he hook me up?
Not yet but I want to try it now! And Z, I still love Panera's mac too.
I know. I'm just really bored and want to do something and no one can do anything yet. So I'm just like wah.
"Trust, then verify." so true. Well said,
Wordpress. But wait, it is not finished yet... At this point looking for feedback and customers... Road ahead :-)
in the words of Jay Z... i love girls girls girls girls... girls i do adore, come put your number on my twitter cause i would love to date u
haha yeah , I know ! I need to get back on my tweet game lol
Part II of cultural extravaganza...Bloody Bloody Andrew Jackson (@ Bloody Bloody Andrew Jackson at the Bernard B. Jacobs Theatre)
we're working on an update to re-enable that on iphone.
Tarp being pulled off the field and some players begin to throw again near dugout, but BIG lightning strike over river draws reaction.
Good call!RT : we live in realm of hybrid libraries same old doesn't help future-service oriented not monolithic ils
Aye!!!! :-) RT : S/O to da females who #haze. Lol that is sexy
what concession stands have funnel cakes? Still can't find them...
Picnic in the grass, a visit to the New Amsterdam Market, oysters, and boxed wine. No complaints.
Being a librarian I appreciate the support you're giving to the libraries.
I agree for vis. lrners concept maps help 2 org.& connect thoughts/like doing math in yr head vs. having 2 writing it down.
It's another gorgeous day! Wow!
I understand candles. They make scents to me.
I am at the meeting - where are you guys????
Im feeling so right.... not gonna,lie a nigga in my bed would make it better;)
I miss yo face as well :)
I think that tingling feeling you get when you really have to pee feels kinda nice... Until it starts to burn....
This quite possibly made my day!! How did this happen&why?
Going to start working on my fitness, mainly stomach muscles, any tips?
OMG #600KMAHOMIES <3 IM SO UNBELIEVABLY PROUD OF YOU AUSTIN<333
I appreciated that Eugenides even gave it a shot in "The Marriage Plot."
London is a great name for a dog.
not really
": "It's easier to go down a hill than up it but the view is much better at the top." - Claude M. Bristol"
I consider myself pretty easy-going but if you chew with your mouth open I will track down and systematically kill everyone close to you.
Geez, I left a floor lamp outside for someone to take and it was gone in less than an hour
Come check out surrender tonight it's going to be awesome!! Free entry just use my name at the guestlist Travis Sosa only
Say hello to TJ, folks!
A man never stands as tall as when he kneels to help a child.
...and very nice to meet you! Tot ziens :)
No(: I'm glad because I created the #twitition but we all know that you're very modest(:
hey Perry, yes indeed, those Brits can be really funny sometimes. Checked out some of your links, what do you do?
#FollowFriday our friends
all I know is they are leaving soon. I think we should get something really exciting there :)
Creating the hashtag for EO GLC Vancouver. #GLCBC -let's use it!
I don't care if you love or hate Nicki Minaj (), it's tough to deny how enjoyable her new album is.
minus kahne RT 5: Look for n Josh Brown tonite on Northwest Sports Tonight 9:30 on n 11 on Kong
Uh oh, frm SEA RT : First Delhi and now San Francisco. Looks like when I leave a city it gets the shakes. I hope all are safe and sound.
Learning from on
Dark chocolate almond milk and frozen banana smoothie for breakfast yum.
#HappyNewYear, Casey + co! To a busily buzzing 2012 :)
Congrats to on her ENGAGEMENT! =) So happy for you!
can you wish Philippines a good evening too?or good morning also??please???we love you here!,damon.
I'm on it, thanks.
"Edwards' hush money source was 101-year-old woman" #yahoonews Was he having an affair with her too?
Walked 5 miles today w/ Skip my horse. Not moving back 2 Malibu until the weight is gone.Well maybe sooner than that.just not sure when
aghhh tattoos I want em. you down?
Sun tan starting now!
Aw don't fall Nicki:(! Getcha award girl... you deserve it!
Our thoughts and prayers go to the Ballesteros family. Seve was not short for Several as there was nobody else like him.
Don't forget, tomorrow is the rare 29th day of February. Happy Leap Year!
how are you today, darlin? How did the audition turn out? I have 3 myself today--- go me! lol :)
I CONCUR!! RT : WAIT THE TIGERS RELEASED BRANDON INGE????? WHY ISNT HE AN ORIOLE LIKE RIGHT NOW??”
My stepdad cut my bracelets... He fucked up its a wrap.
I honestly wanna go back to school.
can't wait to see you on the field this season! hit hard!
you ever go into a Mediterranean restaurant and think that's either the best Hummus or the worst B.O. I've ever smelled?
#goodnight Twitter! ❤ 💤
On this, the next to last day of poetry month, I ask: are you a poet that reads or a poet that rants? ...Choose wisely.
Also thanks to & for the follows or RT's!
Finished advanced copy of Meagan Brothers' Supergirl Mixtapes last night. Good read! Shld come w index of bands named or soundtrack.
Idk nor care
Let's get ready to rumble! Where are you celebrating #SuperBowl? If you don't have plans, stop in #RedMarlin for some drinks on #MissionBay!
Listening to
Gasol is ready
Fitting way to finish the worst sports month ever, right ?
Why do men think whistling at a woman like she is a dog is a good idea? Is that a turn on for anyone? Anyone?
Showing some support and love to your feed!
paychecks make working with idiots not so bad...looks like i need to reward myself with a shopping trip
it's a start to celebrate Indiana innovators that helps build recognition and reputation. Thx for ur passion, we need more of it
Love may be blind, but it can sure find its way around in the dark!
How are you!
Right back at ya my brotha. Lets get this money. I want the entire Billboard Top 10. It's written. GOD bless. 100
A.J. boatta pierce my eyebrow again :D
My phone is being stupid 😡👊💢
Jaguar Land Rover sales surge offsets Tata decline in April Strong demand for Jaguar Land Rover vehicles helped offset weak sales at pare
You a hoe girl & your friends hoes too, you doin hoe shit y'all sip on hoe brew.
I never said id be drunk, maybe drunk off of white people.
You gotta be smart to stay a millionaire... Been doin my groundwork so when it come
#yougettinpunchedif yo mess with any of my friends
": Thanks for the RT!" You are welcome!
Met w the Hokubai Hochi Foundation about archiving and digitizing their newspapers going back to 1902. Ambitious project, but so cool!
i know. one thing i learned was never fight when theres 20 people supportin the other dude. haha oh well. thanks tho bro
Downton Abbey always makes me happy.
how was the #drunktank ?
If you DO, you get.
Aww thanks! I wouldn't talk smack, I am not that way with baseball, now hockey....haha
so pretty out!!!
Im on a hangover
Its Startin To Get Scary Outside . :o
Wisconsin Playground Elite moves to 3-0 on weekend in NIKE League with 80-69 win over Georgia Stars. Duane Wilson with 19, Jamaar McKay 16.
damn alright, I'm here till the 1st, I need your help with something and we need to do some pad work
Still don't think this Heat team is built for a title
“: At 8-4, #Badgers are back within 1 game out of first place in the #B1G Ten.” Iowa loss will haunt Bucky sadly.
Just changed my twitter account from to , folks kept looking for philo ridge and couldn't find us. so here we are
I understand
hittin up 25cent wings and watchin hoops with da crew! Join us!
I definitely agree
I'm not even going to lie, Plato's Closet is the bomb. Deals, deals, deals
Thanks! Was a great night RT : Cheers! “: Happy birthday to & ”
Lmao that's funny. I'm on a app on my phone so I cant now but I will
actually my mom is driving & its a school night :)driving back to Houston after concert! Shes lettin me miss 1 day of school
...do I even want to know?
please make sure they know I need help to!
Just got tickets to see the #HungerGames again. Looking forward to noticing the smaller details this time around.
have you been to Milwaukee Brewing Co yet?!
I need some InDesign training. Anyone know where I could do a workshop?
How about better yet, I send you some! Send your address to . What style are you most interested in? -David
Lookin at purses
Weird. Got a txt message about National Library Week to my personal phone... no idea from whom!
Mind you, I think we're now seeing phones/devices gravitating to just 2-3 choices of mobile OS's
Thanks for coming out to our free financial seminar with and
At the end of 1st quarter, #UVa has a 145-37 advantage in yardage, but the score is tied 7-7.
Law school? Meet a UM Carey Law Admissions Officer today from 10am- noon at Flagler College’s Kenan Plaza on the West Lawn.
When you're crush says hi and all you wanna say back is ' i worship you' ... or is that just me :P
Take that #IndieGoGo! Our Capes and Claims campaign ended on a high note. Thank you everyone for your support.
Dear student: I dread to think what you originally wrote so that your spellchecker corrected to "peephole" instead of "people."
It would be nice to reduce the backlog, but fast track seemed to favor big corporations.
Could The Black Eyes Peas Academy Spawn Other Celebrity Schools?
#pla10 Was great fun. Lots of walking around and chatting. 6-year-old didn't want to go, but she was a hit.
Have a Huge Wedgie.. E-mail me with any advice on how I can avoid wedgies? or text me 954-608-9103
Poetry with makes me do happy!!!!!
My butt feels weird -.-
i watched movies in all my classes today. hell yeah
Thank you! Glad you enjoyed the book :-)
Go bucks go!!!! Let's bring the BC down :)
The reason to fill each day with one's best resonates in words from : "You are what you do every day." So true!
Watching King of Queens.
I'm just tryna see what it be like
My last three days in South Carolina! Back to DC/Northern VA on Saturday!
I'd like to finish the film collection manual before I leave for Houston on Tuesday.
On second thought, a 3-hour nap sounds nice
thanks for a dope show this evening and we'll get you the pics from tonight in the near future!
#WhatIMissMost Being a little kid with no stress, worries, or care in the world.
I love to sing&im good at it;but showchoir is so damn borin'
Im stuck in hell was flippin threw the channels and the tv got stuck on the kardashians this show stinks!!!!
I'll never let go
yay for thursdays!
: I wish when you block somebody...you can't see ANY of their tweets.........at all....
One of the best illustrators in the world...
<- the real glen coco ! ": Too many Glenn Cocos on Twitter"
Problem solved, DM away! We're very thankful that you enjoy CRISP! Please join us again soon. :)
And now these three remain: faith hope and love. But the greatest of these is love. I Cor 13:13 Check out our sermon series Love Life Rehab!
me too
harry is in cali?
The cure for apathy is a good hard kick in the ass. Go out and vote today
1-star wanted level. No biggie.
Well it's a good thing the #Yankees got Hiroki Kuroda.
when I plan on hate fucking someone at the end of the night.
Two shows this weekend, Harrigans South Friday, and Jimmies Cornerstone Saturday! Come Rage your face with me all weekend!
R u challenging me? Cause i dont back down 2 anyone, lol
Crate and Barrel? Girl, I've been on Etsy since YESTERDAY.
#ShawFacts Andrew Shaw is Innocent
yes did you?
Row 4 behind 1st base. Check me out on espn!
it's a labatt. All I drink.
#twinorqueenorking we are cleaning bed sheet sets for free during #freefriday ...
You call this winter??
I wish we still had that
Just saw handful of Stand with Walker supporters by Brkfld Sq. Isn't that like looking 4 converts to Catholicism outside a Catholic church??
Yeah i know. But she's my love..
you should have given me a shot at your lungs. :)
I want to eat an entire candy store right now.
Maintenance Tip from our Service Manager: Your Air Conditioning Unit will not work properly if the temperature outside is below 65 degrees.
daym it! i just got back to my desk. and the ugh! thing about it is that i passed those streets w/out even lookin down. dang!
McSweeney's Farm
To all the people who thought the world was gonna end I hope you feel pretty stupid right now
It's probably my top 5 list of most unattractive things to see.. O_O
For one day, step outside of "conventional" and really enjoy your life
I'm so tired! So I'll probably fall asleep early. I hope I do because staying up late sucks.
just suggested that the first interplanetary social network be called SpaceBook
Day 2 of trying to break the
In three words i can sum up everything I've learned about life. It goes on.
We've friends/family who're white, black, gay, straight, Jewish, Christian, etc. We'll NOT allow POTUS, OWS & media to divide & destroy us!
You were great during the whole DirectTV deal. Congrats on making it through!
Have fun in ATL!!! Go see Joi @ Pal's if u can!! Miss u both!
We will forgive you NBA. Just do what is right! ...Sigma out
this timing for the who's "the best I ever had" is quite possibly the worst ever.
congratulations. Well deserved
Wtf knucklehead?! U r gonna get it for not telling me. I wanna hang. How long r u here
Man you know your tired when you friend ask you tomorrow night at 845 and you ask am or pm. Jeez...
I drink coffee and tea too. Omg I'm just drinking so much so my acne clears up.
The reverse lights on most cars are too dim to provide sufficient illumination when backing up.
Have a safe flight Ari. <3
having a party with all my friends and some family and watching the ball drop. It's gunna be a blast!(:
MBA application deadline is Mon, 5/7. Fall class is shaping up very nicely. Still have room for a few more ambitious working professionals.
When looking at homes, what is the first thing you look at?
well, that's annoying/infuriating. makes me want to do a whole blog post with a
“: #oomf so gorgeous”
My bad: I said ALI was funded by IMLS, which is incorrect. It is funded by NHPRC.
Thank you for following:
Hanging out in an ally with the Eli Young Band!
There's a new roll in town as launches the #UrbanLobsterShackOnWheels this wk! Track that truck for affordable Lobster rolls!
Is anyone awake?!
Statistics may be faulty or unscientific, but never pseudo. Even bad statistics are statistics. I only rely on solid ones.
My mom told me that she doesn't like my short hair -_- then why you didn't say anything before ?
Where can you sip, socialize and share your green ideas? Green Drinks #GSO, of course! Join us tonight @ The Green Bean, 5:30-7pm. C U then!
There are two ways to argue with a woman ... Neither works
NAB 2012 is coming to a close! NewTek was a star! Can't wait until TriCaster 8000 is ready for action!
I checked. I wasn't following her anyway. Who is this random band singing now? I want Justin!
Thanks for the shout out!
Bleed with me and you'll Forever be my Brother.
Well that test went well :-/
Im an idiot. And i love koala bears and pandas. Megan was here!! (:
Longhorn takes Big Apple by storm! Congrats on the new job! Sat. & Sun. AM won't be the same w/o you.
what a cutie
hey yu think i can spit on these joints and yall like executively prod. it we can make a small project dope for promo x shows 2
I have a long list which is more of giving back.With all that money you have to share it cant be greedy.
ok guys tomorrow will be an awesome day cuz tomorrow returns MW3 tip of the day dont miss it it will be every day
4:17pm and Happy Hour is already ROCKING! Join us for a pint and some dinner before you head to Summerfest!
I'm currently eating the chocolate fudge. Classic strawberry still tops the list for me though
that was the best tweet of the day
we could even start a new hashtag for him:
Have you voted "YES"? Tell the world #icheckedyes for #OneUnion!
Congrats, Roger!
Carb loading has begun! One of the nicer benefits of a marathon!!
Correction: it's called True Grime: Crime Scene Clean Up. Check it out!
RT : Just got a NYTimes iPhone alert saying that Mitt Romney has won the Michigan Primary. ON IT!
LAWLZ..healthy food. #teamunhealthy I guess when I have diabetes and you don't I won't be the one laughing.
now..If I I come to some place near europe I would need over 100 people ;)
#SaySomething is amazing.
Love to hera more about the chip round! Email me the details
I can't get that Rihanna song out my head!!! Haha ok goodnight
oh! I thought you broke up?!
nothin like a good nights sleep in your own bed.
she said butt. ha ha
Gas at $3.53. Keep falling
Yes, we are celebrating Law Day! It's a big day for those of us at the ABA.
It's one of the few movies that my wife, girlfriend then, went with me to the show.Went to Portland and stood in line for an hour
Controversial? - I think so but most great ideas ARE. It promises to be an interesting venture non the less!
THANK you! You've always been on the cutting edge, Tucker. Let us commence the joyous pinning!
Hey baseball players: Lay off the neck tattoos.
Happy 4th of July! Enjoy this beautiful day Milwaukee!!!
how's your partner??? I miss talking music with one of my favorite twitter listeners!! #
what??? That is messed up!!
1865???? Shit, nobody texted or sent me an e-mail! Lol! That's the way I feel sometimes too!
Lmao....SALTS RT : DeRay look like a drunk Vanessa Williams!!
Happy #Thanksgiving! We #givethanks to our wonderful donors and #volunteers who make all the difference to our clients.
Incredible group of people at #GrowthTrack last night. Leaders, leaders, and more leaders!
Inspiration needed after just one day of school? Not a good sign...
oh so i am stupid. HAHAHA. i'm sorry, i dont have the best memory.
I am at Willis Tower Observation programmed by #DePaul secondlife team. We have a sim of Loop campus here!!!
Needs four $10 sponsors for program book, feature your business and in turn, support a nonprofit scholarship fund! Msg4more!
Oh the things you hear in public. "yeah I drink BudLight, but I don't DRINK BudLight"
you going? I love.
Wowza. Just listened to the Bulls beat the Bucks on my shower radio in the living room with crappy reception. Good times.
i think u and bruce should write a book together based on parenting or combining familys
i love your chanell a?ways giving it up llaod ...
The new Sunday night crew sucks... I wonder if they get fried chicken and beers delivered to the booth.
is saving this world series by still being in it! Other than that worst broadcast ever !!!! SO BORING
. Can y'all plz get rid of those obnoxious expanding ads? I can't read your stories if the copy keeps moving off the screen!
Thanks for listening Eric!
Laser surgery for your pet means: less pain, less bleeding, less swelling and quicker recovery!
Well, aren't you an interesting guy?
this the life we chose
can play multiple instruments at one time.. with his beard.
Who turned you on to Winterson? Someone in the department?
Boutta clean uhp get dressed and be out all day baby. !
you need to meet !
Are you sure it wasn't Vera's show that he was listening to? That gave me salmanellla once
***AYEHOLE PSA**** Pickn ur nose doesn't define you....but what u do with that finger immediately after.....DOES!
I been thinking about forever .
Our expectations ARE incredibly high!
QoTD: "Those who can -- do. Those who can't -- criticize." (Unknown)
Heading out to make the most of this nasty weather!
you used me , i cried , i could careless what happens to you now :D
Lets Go Hawks! Lets Go Sixers!
Sinus infection are no fun... thankful for and antibiotics though!
Anyone seen the changes to Youtube? What do you guys think?
The Dish says rumor has it that TWO new SweetFrogs are opening in town. Exciting!
Not to mention a masterpiece of reptilian westerns!
smh What was it?
btw i found my dress i think but i dont want to post it cause im not sure
am moving to VA ya'all this is awesome :)
I really hope this week is good & goes by fast . "
if you're bored you could help get the word out about Flatt Energy Cola. Happy to send you some.
TO WHERE BBY. Can you take me with you LoL. (I wish)
Is it me or are all the bounces in these pos going phx way?
That wad AWFUL!!!
Sometimes it feels good knowing Friday is just around the corner, because Saturday can't be far behind.
I'm going to be fat if John keeps on taking me out to eat!Ah!
Madonna is so much awesome!!!
good afternoon, did you see my earlier tweet, regarding a MW3 booster?
Kobe is looking very Ewing-esque with those knee pads. Unfortunately for the celts, his jumper isn't
Scutaro. So hot right now.
Catching up on #thevoice. Love it when people live their dreams. Even if it is fake hair (xtina!)
The horse is named Roxy and she's 34 years old!
The much better alternative is the NHL All Star game! Great viewing.
yes(; I sure hope you like talking to me .? :p
You don't know what it means to win.
Get your cakes, cookies and pastries for your New Year's Eve celebration @ Firehook Bakery & Coffee House!
One of the changes in my life from youth to middle age: chair cushions.
Don't forget #April13 #NightShades comes out! L-Deezy & Shaun H's new joint project.
I think you mean the men at the bar who allow her to buy her own drinks are doing it wrong.
a complete github bias, maybe, but that's not the same thing as missing the point of distributed version control.
Can't get enough of that Texas Music!! Fortunate to work with a lot of them. Vast talent pool for sure in the Lonestar State.
Preach Preachah I know its saturday....but come on!!!
oh still cool af
My mom is making me go to school with pink eye :(
Is amazing its 2 in the morning and I'm still in character OMG
Kitty, you're so hot! Send us an email and we'll work out which lucky kitty-lover gets to shoot with you next. :-)
Oh! I was Rting another Pastor friend of mine. He's a NCSU grad. Not Nineveh! I mean UNC.
Not sleepy anymore ...
yes I think you can see the good in people but not be blinded/deceived by what's not good.You still have to guard your heart!
Thank you =)
Just realized/remembered why I love 17th c. Dutch art: ice hockey players in puffy pants! at
RT : If you see a story about "Useless Majors" in which I'm quoted, understand I don't consider ANY major to be useless.
Happy Earth Day Bloggers!
we wonder if will continue to title Prop D "Financial Reform" when a judge throws that title out in court?
RT : Good luck to and tonight in the
Go like ! Or i will beat you with a tire iron.
Had picked UNC to win it all... Oh well; it's still
Realizing your best friend and you drank for 12 hours straight..... And survived.
Oh chill don't sub me.. not in the mood to catch em
See everyone at the concerts!!!
Where were you tonight???
“When you are tempted to give up, your breakthrough is probably just around the corner.” -Joyce Meyer
Due to circumstances beyond our control, The Mysteries of Chaco Canyon has been postponed to Thursday January 12th at 7 p.m.
3rd Annual Cocktails for Courage honoring USMC Cpt. Kyle Van de Giesen is May 25. Donate to KRV Memorial Award Fund. Contact me
AB is phenom. Cannot forget losing the nest egg in LOST IN AMERICA.
Exciting! I guess you and your fab blog got invited? Too fab!
remember when you said Mcmillian was out coached by gentry? Well he was consistently out coached. Terrible with matchups.
oh yeah? Damn I need to roll with u then :)
i just let her take my breath away
Phones shut off, sucky
So apparently I wear cute shoes 'cause buffalo bought all of mine. I should've brought more !
Actually glad the weekend is over.
Alan Webb battling back at Payton Jordan Invitational - News in photos
Don't try to catch a snowflake with your tongue unless you're positive that it's snow.
Puerto Rico is also among the favs!
hm if you try it let me know.
If you desire to be appreciated, praised and loved, give plenty of them.
lol no worries. Maybe next time haha
Never look back ?
Glen burns is kicking some ass and taking some names.
Is there a piano or keyboard in any of the rooms?
Rex Ryan can tell you how many feet are in a yard. Let the jokes begin.
I have that problem sometimes too.
maybe 'friendly' isn't the word. The rant was more about 'making friends'? No doubt that's tough.
What's everyone doing this weekend?
Your comments on sketching are salient. What medium(s) do you use? Is sketching synonomous with automatic drawing? Your opinion.
someone is going to try to make spelunking cool before this decade is over....I guarantee it.
right! They're too cute <3
really all stores
So far unsuccessful ...might end up on Mall Cops by the end of the night
I can't wait!!
Cool! Thanks!
Which Gale resource does WLC stand for?
Any reports regarding Bounty Paper Towels signing on as a sponsor for a certain team in New Orleans has not been confirmed.
and why are better sex guides mostly written by people you would never want to have sex with?
Sipping a 750 of Harvest Ale - brought to me from Kalamazoo by - pretty awesome fresh harvest ale.
my twitter feed is exploding with Egypt messiness. Call me crazy, but live rounds? Time for the hotel
No actually it's for this debutante thing I'm doing (but not an actual cotillion because it's cheapter and less time haha)
I know, let's hope no one notices.
Oh Lord, touch this little child with healing...prayers going up for your family.
Obama's Rolling Stone treatment -- politics to pop - The Associated Press
My day consists of watching the incredibles in french, sitting around in art and then sleeping in yoga.
See I don't know what yal been told , but I gotta get me a big bank roll 💰💰💰
peer pressure
literally they make everything better! And hugs. Hugs are where it's at :)
oh ok perfect
Excited for the #BiblioBash Press tonight...
I only watch the #oscars for the commercials
try the quail with a glass of Ramey Chardonnay and the glazed squash!
ha nice I saw that tweet about the cutest guys on twitter and I was honored to be included with all those famous people lol
about this nigga in prison
Thanks to Holy Trinity Baptist Church for your warm welcome and inspiring sermon. We will return!
This crush just aint going awayy.
Ol turtle looking ass
RT “ S/o to this nigga lol he gettin on the dance floor”
The only thing I eat from Burger King: Chicken, Cranberry, Apple salad w/ranch dressing>>>>>>>>
ahh ya you right
Remember that great feeling of getting 2 spaceships in Galaga...
I can't sleep!!
Last week, author visits in Arlington, Oh, followed by 2 in Fairview Park, Oh. This week: Dayton.
hi guys 96 tweets
yea i no and u probably wished u saw me take a shower right
Grateful for your ears :) <3
Going to bed!
yup i fucks wit ya movement keep it up
went shopping in portland todayy:))
In everything you do: Build bridges, not walls.
Happy Father's Day to all the dads and father figures out there! :)
like it :D ;D
One of America’s founding fathers, Patrick Henry was a two-time governor of Virginia & a strong advocate of the American Revolution.
had to buy a new battery f$&!!
Happy Monday tweeps!
I wanna go home in my own bed....smfh
": it's better to walk the dog then let the dog walk u lol" I know right!!!
#ReplaceSongsWithMindless the mindless her:)(the real her)
Ambient data - information we create as we participate in digital environments
it's alright I already broke one of them this week 9 to go I guess f^_^;)
#How2makeABlackPersonMad step on the new J's u just got
Good word, I'm having a positive influence on you!
let's get together this week to record an episode for our new podcast.
I can't believe I'm actually falling for someone this feels so weird, I haven't felt this way in a long time. I'm very curious and still :)
haha badass girl! I got a B! So hello B! ((: which I am totally okay with. Haha.
Should clarify that I'm not certain that is automated. A cursory look at the account's stream suggests perhaps not.
Shush now...You think you have it bad? They're BUILDING a freaking house outside my window. ALL DAY LONG...argh...
a genuine pot pourri of interesting vernacular
only if we can do earlier. Gota work tomorrow
looks like a pretty cool company to work for. I love the thought about Ramen as a special interest.
yes! She's my lover
Last night before bed: gave feedback on a student's infographic; finalized rubric for this morning's oral reports.
And another thing: if your religion mandates oppression, it's bullshit, whether we're talking race, gender, or sexual orientation.
The Heat are looking pretty bad right now..
#LMSunSIG how can use data to determine what makes a successful student
that might be a job for xul-runner. Could fake a browser session somehow using a small browser?
Yup he want it!!
you love going to the brewhouse? why don't you have us deliver you food again? We miss you!!! Dill chips? Pretzel Burgers?
Haven't Had Enough by Marianas Trench ()
REALLY?! Oh jeez. Really? Wait--the two weeks after the piece went live? I don't see them in the comments? On Twitter? Where?
just saw the baddass trailer for #Excision. You are beyond brilliant! Cannot wait to watch!
The winners of "For The Ladies" are... Congrats! DM your email address.
sperms are dangerous lol
Beautiful day on the bluff. Excellent weekend. Not looking forward to snow on Thursday. You read right. snow.
Dwight Howard is out for the season and it looks like Pacers will play Howard-less Magic in first round of playoffs.
did you get your ticket? hahaha
“OMG, earthquake!” “Let's go tweet this sh*t.”
I think it would be cool if you would cover All Day by Cody Simpson :) Just a suggestion :)
Ha. At least Facilities fixed it!
President Obama tries out Sphero, the iPhone controlled rolling ...
finding the perfect partner is hard cuz their isnt one their is only the righ one
you Jenner girls look so adorable, luv ur style<3
we'll miss u big guy!
Shout out to and Julian for visiting me at work!! I love y'all crazzy asses!! Whoop!!
i'd like to b everything you want(: <3
Um... So my save file from ME3 is gone. All the gameplay vanished. Has this ever happened to anyone with a game on their 360
lmao ok I tought u mean Houston yea u in ur own lil world
Wouldn't be springtime w/o suffering thru #spurs complaining thru #nba playoff game.
How are you #marketing your #business on #socialmedia right now? What platforms are you using?
Making sweet tea :)
yeaa i see. pero i cnt wait to see u its been forever
Bad sleep for me also. (as predicted) Dropped off Kate's car and she's out cold with her new sleeping mask on already.
5 Days until I'm off to Vegas to play some cards.
After you clear your driveway, why not take a Ford Rouge tour today? The snow day has not slowed F-150 production.
1+ year into my master's - and I can finally tell you what the differences are among tags, elements, and attributes. Thanks, :)
I thought Mellencamp was going to be a shoo-in for this one. Maybe next time.
tweet me a question and a number and ill tell you witch ICONic Boy you look good with=D
"Someone talk to me." "Hey!" "Lol, no not you."
Having a large Super Bowl Party? We can supply all your hot dog needs...wings are out...dogs are in!!!!
Audition Tip: When learning a new song, it’s often a good idea to work on the lyrics separately from the music at first.
she is not answering me:(
Great talk by talk about defensive programming, great examples.
Yes! You're welcome to have your crappy ass incessant rain and gray skies back anytime. LOL!
Nugent for the game winning kick!! Bengals win!
and are the best!! You guys make me laugh when I'm down :)
What happens if a car comes? - You die. What? - Just Relax.
The JPA 5K is on August 18th in Grant Park!!! Help prevent and treat child abuse by attending this great event! Visit www.juvenile.org.
That is a tough one. 7.5 wow. Even with Rondo back and Smith out I still think it will be a close game. Hawks will be pumped.
RT : Fun for all! Win a 12-month family membership to the YMCA of Metropolitan Milwaukee! Text YMCA to 71037 and be in......
yeah ave, i care!
QQin foward to all the SLP's being done with their summer vacays. We've been so busy, I miss sharing info and ideas!
It's going to be so hard for me to leave... I know it.
you are correct, that is the unrivaled Wicked Hop Bloody Mary...deliciousness!
Hey girl! Just checking in and wanted to say hi! How's life in the DC?
no! Cause i still make time for bffs!!! 😚
well, depends in what you mean by "relevant".
So thankful for my friends and family!
- nah, but the damn song stuck in my head
hello, i love you :) <3
That man never seems to age. Unbelievable!
Lol you go hard!!
I wanted to see some more alcatraz and terra nova and missing.
“: I cant deny the spurs” ~ that's my girl!
Cool. I'm in W Philly, but it's easy to come east/south. It looks like there are some AWESOME events. Beer+food or just beer?
Support our kids! RT : You can help out UCD Children's Hospital now & talk to ! Call 855-880-6555 to donate to #Careathon!
Don't try taping our practice or on behalf of Bronco nation, I'll jumpkick you in the chest.
so you can't copyright a tweet?
It's pouring outside! I think we will veg on the couch. :)
They counted the last shot??? Oh Lord...someone check the rooftops and bridges
MUST HAVE MORE !
Love my seniors it was real
Great day today, successful quince it was lovely all pink and girly 💁💗🎀
all it takes is hard work and consistency! you'll get there :-) how far are you swimming in each workout now?
I'm watching American Idol!(:
Burger Lounge opened downtown!! I'm very happy about this info.
. & on strategy/tactics: strategy=plans you make to advance goals; tactics=things you do 2 advance strategy
that iJever kid is seriously making me sick to my stomach!!! Don't listen to haters Austin! You have 300K more followers :)
rventura asst coach for HIGH SCHOOL team and wsox hired him! ryno coaches triple-a team to 80-64 record and not good enough?
just sitting here listening to 11:11 bye gorgeous austin <3 (:
you're making me hot! Serious tho, I remember spending time trying to learn manipulate and join data in Python
#LSCon is there a mobile app for the learning activities at the conference?
followed :D
Ouch! Good one.
Spending cuts in England have caused nothing but layoffs, hardship, economic slowdown and #Riots. Do we want the same in the US?
Fellas If you keep attracting fleas, stop being dogs!
Diablo 3 comming out on May, there goes my carpal tunnel...
I just read that one of the brains I was really hoping to see has been vandalized, which is disappointing.
Men in black I? I guess will smith had to pay for another addition to his mansion.
Secrets (the band) answered my message on facebook<3 :3 hehehehe
so this is weird...Diesel fuel smell reminds me of my dad b/c he is in the oil biz & used to clean up spills when I was lil
best show ever!
Good mornin LA
Getting our grub on at Trader Vics with Stacy.
I hope i did well .
I SECOND THAT VOTE.
Enjoying a rare (but well deserved) Tuesday off by doing little beyond what is absolutely necessary.
The most memorable people in your life will be the ones who loved you when you weren't very lovable ~
Whatever keeps the drinks flowing right? LOL
Under handouts, "Google Competition Guidelines (Full Book)" #adv3340 has the post campaign guidelines.
geez Nicki was trying to be creative. whether you liked it or not, can't you respect that?
Next up: Charlottesville schools invest in manual typewriters! How about a class in setting type? Repairing steam engines?
come check out the new batcave... nipsey's so to speak...
I have absolutely no books to read. Any suggestions? Non-fiction or Fiction, anything.
thanks for the follow
Yep, no end in site for those black bags. Restoration *should* begin in March, but no word on an end date.
does the X Factor go live?
#BuildYourFans - Did you know that you'll never be discovered in the music industry if you never become discoverable?
spain today so wont be on here for 3 weeks, if you follow me ill follow you back when i am in americaa, justin i love you have got world2.0
I no it's not official parade but 10or mote midgets in a line counts for a parade in my book
it's fine. Don't worry about it.
Thanks for the follow. Love your website too.
Well, I heard Mr. Young sing about her.
aw thank you! it was amazing! i wish all her fans could meet her :')
People with the gift of encouragement: thank u for utilizing your gift!!! U have no idea how much u impact others! Keep encouraging!
Thank so much for these!
at this time next week, i'll be T minus 12 minutes to the Avengers premier in IMAX 3D
got a little injury hopefully he will be ready by tomorrow for Old Gold practice.
Fight Night baby!!! Yeah! :-)
Disaster Greg tells me that Sonny Bono likes to pick up hitchhikers and beat them with China
I Just Wanna Graduate High School , Graduate College & Live My Life The Way I Want It To Be , <3!
I like that - "be an entreprneur -- only job guaranteed at graduation"
- I was just being funny. No harm intended. Have a great weekend as well. Go Heat!
Looks like dog shit has wound up on shoes. Hat tip to Kris Michele
I wanna go to Kfc nd eat a Famous Bowl
Discriminative actions determine the sanity of a person. As impulsive actions displace discriminative actions one loses one's sanity.
if you take humor away from the uglies, what do they have left? The Food Network?
What do you think ?? --> RT ::: UOFLOL is inferior to UK. Just accept it
Ouch. How are Taylor Griffin's stats looking this year? RT Damn, even Robin has 1
lmao get back get back you don't know me like that
that was fun!
Trying to work out how many mobile phones I've had since the beginning! I reckon over 40! :-)
When my senior year come ima have a blast
4 Leaf Clovers?
oh ok thx anyway
Omg! Rerouted off I43 - man on other side of overpass and police trying to talk him down.
Selling yourself short here I feel...I'd go for Jennings at this point over Choo though
Lets get the band back together! #likeminds RT : #FF to who introduced me to Starwars, Mac & Cat <3er
Lauryn Hill to get my morning going.
In the WORST mood ever smh!!
life is good. You? Did someone make fool of themselves? "Olstad used to do that."
Here now
Tequila Won't Wait! I love it! can I come to your next event?
Guilty pleasure...Gringo Honeymoon-Robert Earl Keen
(1) has lived in the U.S. for ten years, (2) has been a person of good moral character,
Thank you for listening RT : Thank you for releasing a new Ablaye Cissoko album! "Sira" was transcendent
Lmao RT : At least my curls are REAL - And my mother knows who my daddy is, unlike some of you
The Battle of Lexington is finally here! Cheer on the men's & women's basketball teams at 5:30pm as they take on John Jay. WE ARE BARUCH!
same here, its makes me cringe
thats one lucky guy
Training this morning at
for sure!! u know I always show mad love!! so what u got goin on this week?
no one is allergic to waffles. NO ONE.
Durant has higher 3PM% and FTM%. Explain efficiency to me again?
Good luck Emily!! 1/2 marathon is my favorite distance. I'll run 13.1 tomorrow in support of you!
I know right.
Haven't had time to watch ESPN this week but I'm guessing this is what I missed: Kemp Kemp Kemp Harper Pujols Harper Kemp Pujols NATITUDE
"Going up nort this weekend to get away from the city buzz" **lives in Slinger**
Yes, I would be one of those who's checking out on phone while presenter is speaking abt platform
your fans make you who are now! Would you follow me please??
Thanks, they stuck to the paper cups, so next time Pam is my friend.
Loved part 1 of the performers showcase. So fun!
“: EEK! A little late this morning! Will arrive to booth 4134 closer to 11:45 #SDCC” sounds like us yesterday :-)
Had dinner at Incanto, San Francisco, this evening. They boast loose leaf tea options, very cool!
I don't know. I know a few gals that might be on board with being called "the boobs." :)
The tide is shifting to online applications.
The Lizzie McGuire movie is treading.... Good times. I loved that show.
Sure! O Magazine, Psychology Today, TIME, Food Network Magazine and Martha Stewart Living : )
Never become to cocky especially about your game. Anything can happen. Appreciate it don't brag.
some cool things would require an account, but trying to avoid that when possible
Come into M to meet our new additions! Gabriel - Gilad "GG" - and Nancy! Welcome to our M family!
You ain't lyin':):)! I hope so too!
+1 please! RT : Wow, s'more pitch at #tsdday was great. Sign me up.
#YouKnowYoureBroke you look forward to eating Ramen noodles for breakfast, lunch and Dinner
I won my NCAA basketball bracket, this must speed up my American citizenship. I'm even a little surprised my Green Card hasn't arrived yet..
Oh what I wouldn't do
from where is it even out yet?
Installed FireFox cuz Windows Azure doesn't let me log out to use my other Live account. Sometimes SignOut button is just a suggestion.
do your homework!!!
what or when wwII, how do we save ourselves?
if cute boy really likes you he won't care. He'll just be happy to hear from you.
No kidding! And lots and lots of armchair coaches. ;)
you can pick it up from Amanda at our office!
I get jealous!
Hey! Good to meet you. Questions about video? CC
This construction worker saw me walking, while I was on my way to dunkin donuts and he goes "miss ur beautiful but may I say ur shoe" Lmao
"Why me?" "Because you saw me when I was invisible."
Let's see what drama today has in store.
I've been watching folks use it expressively and often for the past few weeks. It's a great little app!
it isn't nice to talk about yourself
Grand Slam in the making!!! Cano!!!
Hm, do I like Twitter for droids or Tweetcaster better?
Legendary race driver and Shelby Cobra sports car designer Carroll Shelby has died at age 89.
hey Thembisa. How u making out? I know your glad to be delivering before the heat kicks in. You taking it easy?
Live Blog: Republican Party of Iowa Lincoln Dinner « State Politics
Aww. Thank you! U as well!
3 yr old just said, "It's time to party!"
Italy can really be an issue for the EU since that economy is the 3rd largest in the EU and 3 x the size of Spain.
To achieve greatness, start where you are, use what you have, do what you can. - Arthur Ashe
"Back to Bulgaria Brunch" with
Kristen Stewart puts Robert Pattinson on a diet?
DATE NIGHT: Dinner Theater is making a comeback! Check out the local restaurants that are playing movies while you dine!
We'd love to make you lunch sometime. Stop by soon!
*Hopes and prays that the Flordia heat stalks her back to Chicago and chants* No More snow! No more snow! XD
Why are there never any attractive people at the DMV? Plus it looks like everyone just got out of bed.
SEO Dubai leading from the front |
I think our twitter got hacked. Did anyone get a weird message from us about a funny video of you?
Sounds like an awesome Christmas! Cheers!
Ooh. It might be different for a man going. But I'm telling you, as a female... life is good in Baltimore lol
Hi Brian - thanks for following Better Wine Guide, now following you too!
Every time it snows I say to myself "I should really buck up and buy some winter boots." And that's as far as I get with that.
-So you're that popular huh? I think you also try to create a full #artmasterpiece each time you play, which also takes time :)
Ok so go to youtube, type in watch her videos, click subscribe and Bob's your uncle! :')
I've always been curious about whether we should put "Video" in the headline at all, and if so, where. Beginning, or end for SEO?
Thank you for the follow. We sent an e-mail about our Congressional Candidate Forum on May 3. Hope to hear back from you!
All of my followers are gonna look beautiful at prom tonight 💜💃👠🎉
So true": No kid should need $10,000 a month to live smh....child support for folks with money is crazy!!!!"
Thank you. Why it came back on is such a mystery. But we look forward to your rep coming out. But football is on! Yahoo!
S/O from the CEO's of Ganksta Enterprize!!! Thanks for the luv
Heartbreak Hotel is located at 2321 4th St NE in
Reminder: Our central office will reopen on Wednesday, Jan 4th at 9:00 AM. Resource Centers in the residence halls will be open tomorrow.
Working at the zoo on a rainy dreary day. So far, no one is interested in coming, but I can't blame them, I don't want to be here either.
Chilling for a minute!
- #Graduation is upon us! Need the perfect gift? Come into and get a travel coffee mug... HOT OR COLD!!
Dude. Why are the batteries missing from the remote?
U really aint RT : Lol I swear on my last tweet...hahaha😂😂😂
I yield. Bruins need to score on one of these gift power plays though..
thanks for spreading the word!
HA. YES. And then I proceeded to say "BABY!" lol.
Love the Miami sun!
What do we teach our children?We should say to each of them: Do you know what you are? You are a marvel. You have the capacity for anything
Driving on 405 freeway in So Cal today and on a huge billboard #espn is advertising the LSU/BAMA game Jan 9th
i need new talkin buddies !!
Women in Leadership Conference podcasts now available on itunes under U.Va. Academic Lectures!
Can't wait for #StPatricksDay at #MoheganSun !
ugh i rly dont wanna go to school tomorrow :/
It's so nice outside today, we wish it time for the season to start! Let us know if you're as excited as we are!
Clearly. It's no accident that I'm all over the Twitters today.
I don't really give a fuck, and my excuse is that I'm young
A new book of interest: "Words Made Flesh: 19th-Century Deaf Education and the Growth of Deaf Culture." NYU Press.
are you at the new office? I'm downtown bham, I wanna come by and see the digs!
My money it's out of her
wouldn't THAT have been nice!
JAY-Z TIX TEN BUCKS???? I'M THERE!! LOL
I am in such a bad mood. Somebody get me a hot dog covered in sauerkraut, chili, cheese, onions, and mustard.
I was ridin dirty for a min and didn't even know, lol RT Emissions is some bull!!
Why qualify it with "possibly"? LBJ's Great Society package has got to rank only behind FDR's New Deal, right?
Kids are sleeping and I am thankful for some writing time :)
Facebook is down?
Gotta say whats up to my man who's crushing it tonight
When somebody blames it on someone else and you are guilty. LOL!
i love it!
ima get it in NEXT YEAR 2013 SENIORs
And the Oscar for best complaining online about the Oscars goes to...
Hoping to find a car today so I can unload the rental :)
I think your account has been hacked, as you're sending out not so good messages.
My friend is 4 followers away from 2,000, please help her out by following her, she will follow you back!:)
You're welcome... thanks for watching!
We are so happy to be there every month! Are you helping out tomorrow?
hehe thank you as well
If this asshole tries anything, good luck to you. I'm tired of this.
Why waste money on psychotherapy when you can listen to the B Minor Mass?
yessir what you mean one at a time?
Mine too! Super excited for this opportunity!
just chill Matty to fatty. This between Spain, scientology and myself... Harvey Wednesday,
dude its way funner inside
Today I did a total of 50 pushups thanks to the Hundred Pushups Android app. (Week 3, Day 2, Level 1)
the wrong way if you're looking for warmth
i cant right now im on following limit but when i can srt followinagainill foll her i just need morefollowers
That's me! :D
I was thinking like california guess I was wrong!
i wish it was still a habit for me to just sign onto twitter :(( i miss it
A huge wind storm is a terrible time to live on a boat.
I DISLIKE PEOPLE WHO MAKE THINGS HARDER THAN WHAT IT REALLY IS
Let's do this Monday, you and me
so sweet!
I'm surprised they're even hanging around upstairs today instead of in the basement where it's much cooler.
I need some time. Then ask me if I am happy.
And so it begins tonight!
MY SECRET TO WEALTH! become President of the United States, or become a congressmen or a Senator! This info only $19.95 limited offer only!
college isn't for me but the closest is sjsu
When you love a man, he becomes more than a body
your image is up on the screen because of your tweet,
what's hat size he won't answer me
celerity rehab. celerity fit club. it's amazing. you can now make it in show business by failing in show business.
nice box
that looks amazing! Happy birthday Mel :)
#ThingsGhettoPeopleDo spell wrong
Random dude in the drive-thru just yelled he loved my jacket. Strange and awesome at the same time.
dope as fuck! Is that you spittin?
I can't believe JFK had an affair with this lady. She is crazy old! Those Kennedy's were freaks!
Question: which was harder Acy's dunk or take down of Frease?
good stuff, eh?
I dont remember people...you shouldnt have made yourself a memory
Like a tasty awesome trap.
Nice to see both teams wearing standard unis for their bowl game.
#WhatNotToSayDuringSex #SayHelloToMyLilFriend, His name Is Billy and he's a #Dwarf. See him over there
Urgent! Special surprise show this sunday night at The Legendary Dobbs w/ Interscopes hottest new band we need 2-3 support acts rock/pop
WOO OH YEAH!!! My Favorite Bar in Vegas is now following me!!!! Can't wait to see you guys in August!!! #FTW !!!!
It's going to be a rough year. Night games never work in our favor.
how was the rest of the weekend? We collapsed on Sat night, and I basically slept away most of Sunday. Christian seems great!
Only person at the bus stop with no friends. Cool life.
Yup! And I'll find that paleo recipe website and link you. showed me. Pinterest has some too.
Bored hit me up or add me on Myspace
Real Estate Investing TIP-When scanning classified ads, look for terms such as handyman special or fixer-upper
Thank you, Penn Station, for playing "O mio babbino caro". Surprisingly classy and quite pleasant!
>>>MLM News! Adaptogenix( New Company Listing )
Bianca's listening & singing along to 'What Makes You Beautiful' in the shower \m/ <3
i lost my starbucks card - if i get it replaced will i still retain my reward star status from the lost card?
Q3 Would have to say a bit of shamrock juice, some rainbow dew...and Oil Of Olay!
he's got some story. im gonna need kleenex
S. Fish :~ When you submit to *my* definitive arguments, I become immortal. So you young team-builders must have mortality issues.
JP of Douglasville, GA will be making pizza at theHarbor Freight Sales Event today/tomorrow from 11am -9pm. Come out a have a bite with us!
Oh, that's cool mediacom. I didn't want to hear the last three minutes of the Office. Now is a splendid time for an emergency test.
. & are tweeting the Oakland City Council meeting discussion around Alan Blueford's killing.
you are always first on my list!! Much rather see you of course <3
guess ill just sit here bored for the next 3.5 hours smh
I wanna play four square ):
just domain reg, no hosting. Support is good & actually knowledgable. Shopping cart for domain reg also nice, no up sell like GD.
haha they'll fail right away then no longer bother me! Good idea(:
Just sent you tracking via DM. Says it was delivered 4/11. Let me know if not.
They're old enough.
Mike: How would you ever go to prison? The worst thing you've done is your life is steal two E.L. Fudge Cookies from your mom.
Realizing I am out of conditioner 30 seconds after getting in the shower was the highlight of my fucking day!
DON'T FORGET TO LIKE OUR PAGE!!!
well you could have talked to my bestest frann on twitter..and we have talked before..
you probably have a device on you that can shoot decent video, whats stopping you? capture and shame some moments - steve garfield
After many eons of time, the Gods at last looked upon those curious humans tampering with the forests and gardens of the world
i have big thumbs... And my buttons are little on my ipod:(
Are you just jealous that my recipes get more pins than yours?
Having drinks and food with friends. It's been a while since I've been out and I missed it!
but I'm not a Jew so there's no née to be mean !
listening to talk about all the free shit vista print has to offer & surprisingly not that hungry
jajaja I got you homie! Btw You're 👍👌in my book for loving frees.
What a lunch! Everette & Jones in Jack London Square. Um...m God is good!
I'm still on a Noah Puckerman high. #Glee He's so amazing.
Instead of adding every last country to our order form we've been adding new ones when requested. Requested this morning: Slovenia & Kuwait
nah son, i want my hit back kid
“: Just realised not enough on za'atar in new book.” New book in the works? Fantastic news from London chef and author of Plenty
A friend is someone who understands your past, believes in your future, and accepts you just the way you are.
he really did tho
Don't ya just hate 2 day old retweets...
you have my number *cough, cough*
do your fans know you are a budding watercolor artist? see, a sensitive side
I read that, absolutely hilarious...covert ops in a technological age.
I'll high five you in those sweet panda undies
It's a fine line between a 'clear conscience' and bad memory!
Doing what passes as "dancing" for me, just wiped out on the floor of 963 jumping to Paramore's "Misery Business". Ow. Stupid flip flops.
'Turnaround', 'Deckchair Orange- Dance with the Geeks', 'Don't You Go', & 'Fanning the Fire' at #OldeTownStadium at 2PM!
might have to explain via a blog post...
cant sleep
Dear Jose, this is not the forum to contact me, my e-mail is . Thank you for yr kindness towards my parents
What's your favorite dinner the night before a #halfmarathon?
Women,Weed,Weather
Thinking it's time for a nap!
their fans will talk smack regardless. They are talking smack about their preseason ranking. They have short man syndrome.
Conrad Herwig, David Bixler, Tony Franklin, Mike Sharfe, and Phil DeGreg burning at the wisp right now!
If the French won on #CincoDeMayo we would be wearing berets and swigging wine right now. Viva Mexico! Check in with Belly at
it is about time!
Hi Jeff thanks for the follow...following you too!
Everyone go follow he deserves more followers!!
ikr i got to go shoppin to day at great lakes
In the wake of all this full cage vs. 3/4 shield debate, I will ask once again why neck guards aren't mandatory at all levels of hockey.
thinks some people need to open their eyes
Let's go
thank you for tweeting that piece jenna!
RT : ": Christan, do you see yourself as the loving slave of a loving Master?"
we love you too!
You just assumed it was, who? The 3rd PR intern?
This LSU game is keeping me glued to the couch! These teams are just to good for eachother!
The Old Busy is kind of confused about all this New Busy stuff.
I wonder how it would be to live in a town with population 900!
Im not going to Florida.
I know.. It's different haha
wuts up with dat track ma dude
:-D si mi Amiga Fabulosa! You have a great day too
SAVE THE DATE | 32nd Annual NBMBAA Conference & Career Expo | Sept. 21-25 in L.A. | www.nbmbaa.org
Thanks, Dan. We think so, too :)
I miss my crew Josephine, Amie, and Hafy! When will we meet again? :(
Make a point to finish everything that you start. Continue your move forward.
Goin to the chapel and my frienns gettin married!
yeah lol so were yu from? ?
Fucking glitter... you can only blame it on your wife so many times before she stops waring it.
Not a UGA fan, but seeing far more purple and gold in ATL so far today than red and black. Looking like LSU fans might take over the dome.
Life has been breathed into my first solo business venture today. My team and I will be taking Indy by storm! Nov 2011 launch date.
still following u be easy
Wish she was single though. Know I probably wouldn't get a chance no way.
I'm here!
it's not how many but who that matters.
burned the aforementioned potatoes while looking for friends on twitter.
I'm in the edge of my NY seat. GO
Thank you Ashley. Well done. ~Richie
very nice. Can you please email me?
I actually enjoy your hugs. <(^-^<) LOL. you're welcome :) Joy goes to sleep now though. :)
Watching Fresh Prince Of Bel Air.
I feel disgusting ----_____----
Little Miss Sunshine!
Chavez&#39;s Advice of Slowing 0.five Hour | Wireless Services ...
Hope you feel better soon!
But really 😒
when you get vip, do you just get the vip or do you have to get a ticket as well?
The other day was a really good moment. More, please!
Someone's trying to trend We Want A New Mahone Single. LOL DO YOU NOT APPRECIATE WHAT HE DOES FOR US ALREADY OR.
Wow just got the shit scared out of me. Talking to my daughter online and a big bang on the back of the trailer. Damn it was a dear.
Maybe the office of public art has an e-blast they'd send it out on? or put it out on the roboto board?(I don't have a login)
Hematology Software helps increase laboratory efficiency.
I'd rather go out and get it "sooner."
thanks for the Friday Follow!
Followed back (:
I am watching WhoDoUThinkUR & am wistful to find out about my stolen history. I want to know where in #Africa my people come from.
LoL. Im in love right now.
Too bad Angelina Jolie couldn't attend the Oscars. But it's nice that her skeleton was able to make it in her place.
IMPORTANT: The press, LEFT, RIGHT,ALL CONTRIBUTED TO MISINFORMATION about the ACA. MEDIA
What a crazy night it was last night at the Indiana State Fair at the SUGARLAND concert! So blessed my family and I are okay! Keep praying!
I assume your flat is rented during the festival?
Jamie's new video > NIP SLIP
Are you ok?? :0
Just had a lovely interview with a writer for my alma mater,St John's College"s quarterly magazine.
in-house counsel getting so much pressure from their C-suites (not lawyers) who want the expenses to be predictable.
My phone is dying slowly although it's charging.. Smh
meeting the players would definitly make my life!! But so would the pleasure to meet a wonderful amazing woman like you g-ma<3
why u frowning
Census site...very cool, Jared, very cool.
Rust Belt Lights, The Tired and True, Legend Has It, & MORE! TOMORROW! Anyone coming?
she actin all sidity thats cuz she know she bad! she make her own money, spend it like she never had!
dude. so I'm walking to the bus stop, & my brother yells out the door that there's a two-hour delay. forrrrreal?
Thanks for following me :) Like me, are you an Etsy Stalker fan too?
My new logo is live!
sadly they do 😔😞😖😭 kmsl “: WHAT HOW HE KNOW WHERE YOU WORK... Damn all the men want a piece of you 😳”
yea, 'subship' sounds like an underdeveloped ship :)
Here's a lunch idea for you: 2 hard boiled eggs from the deli, 1 medium carrot and a banana. Low carb and easy on your wallet. About $1.50
and I are alone in 's room while she's at rehearsal #ihopechristinadoesn'tshowup
I was gonna invite him to my graduation, but idk if he'd go. and idk how to get in contact with him. I'm at a loss.
Finished my last essay woo
Every woman's heart has different instructions. They're written through her eyes, in her smile, through her actions and in her tears.
Your social media deck would be more persuasive if the videos were viewable on mobile devices. They're not.
How is Wisconsin celebrating St. Patrick's Day? Shamrock Shindig Pub Crawl? Erin Parade? A.J. O'Brady's in Menomonee Falls? Talk to me!
“: I need tweetlogix” that shit cost
good luck!
“Let’s get rich and give everybody nice sweaters and teach them how to dance” - . If only we could.
I'll come back when you guys do
no problem
. . $1 MORE/gal tax? Hold current tax to keep price down. Drop Subsidies & Tax Oil Profiteers! .
Life goes on, you should too
we will make sure to buy a copy we totally support anything to do with #autism! Very proud of your boy
Last tweet was an excited squeal BTW should've seen the looks I got when I screeched. #Indians are tied
When I was younger I wanted to grow up fast, now I want to be young again.
Missed you guys Thursday. Sorry I couldn't make it but in the words of Arnold.... "I'll be back!"
But basketball is so much more interesting :-)
"And in the morning... IM MAKING WAFFLES!"
will do!
Love being a model
Chill'n in my pj's back hurts so bad gotta get up at 430. Go to sleep or stay up...?
can't laugh. Hurts too much.
u now wat i think..i think justin shud be on silent libary agen but this time wit his friends...haha just a thought cuz i just saw the show
Not gone fishn saturday but going sunday
I wish more guys understood this!!!! Yes!!
And the $3000 People's Choice Award goes to ChrondroPro Biosciences! Thanks to all who voted!
I cant get your smile outta my mind... :)
Haha we must have another sushi sake date then soon 😉
These black people on Jerry springer right now <<<< , clapping their hands and shit.
When me and Dustin go to get mulch and get blew at by stupid people>>>
press it!
Forbes Travel Guide Launches In Shanghai, China
Was honored to attend and help out at last week's Leadership & SunTrust Distinguished Leader of Merit Awards Dinner for ! Congr…
I am so glad it's Friday!!!! Can't wait to relax all weekend
I like the original Blues Clues guy. Second dude is creepy.
Trent Richardson is a 3rd-4th rounder rumored to be taken with the 3rd-4th pick.
They can definitely be super hot! (Though sometimes the squeaks are hard to edit...)
Idaho infant dies from whooping cough amid regional outbreak - Chicago Tribune
RT : Ridge on isolationism: US didn't become great by accident. We projected leadership w/ diplomacy & development
Why am i up so early?
? For what?
YOU BETTA COME ON SATURDAY......OR ELSE I'm a DROPP KICK YOU .. :-)
You gotta be kiddin me
sat with belinda at my daughter Holland's soccer game last week. we had a ball! she is doll...don't know how she puts up...
Oh. My. God. She turned her car off in the middle of the road.
Talking about LibraryThing with a coworker
lol, you know where to get one! Auction details will be released tomorrow #SGD11 RT : I want a Chelios stick!
Thank you for the best night ever with
ahh shucks, gee thanks! *kicks dirt with hands in pockets
Fairfax Choral Society will audition new voices on June 1st. See fairfaxchoralsociety.org for details.
TMZ reports Davy Jones of The Monkees passed away.Is this true?
Pre apartment/house hunting sucks!
Made a bed on the couch to enjoy the
Looking forward to the writerly conversation > Thanks for following me!
In Tacoma ~ suggestions on where to have lunch?
Grad UO last year. To me, it's just normal. Nothing "new" about it. This gen of UO students collectively yawned @ the story.
Hey Matt, thanks for following! How's your Friday going so far?
If you don't love me at my worst, hopefully you'll still blow me at my best.
Great job by Brent moron of hitting into yet another DP.
Olivia's attention to detail. She is a machine! I hope the real Olivia writes a book.
(: how are you?
About to get my hair done……Lol, I still don't know what I going to get :/
Thanks for the
Tonight's triple noir feature has turned into a QUADRUPLE feature! I'll be a full fledged gumshoe by the end of the night.
Goodnight ❤ happy early birthday ❤
So happy to hear it! RT : My mom is thrilled to FINALLY take off some lbs. I have not seen her this happy in too long.
sure, followed :)
fine :) what are u doing this day?? ;)
Nice game, Marquette! 10-0 for the first time in 10 years!
...heard gr'dad say in background "Just take a picture of any house and tell me that's where I lived - how do I know?"
I have such great memories of skiing with my dad for the first time.
12 more wins to go!! #LetsGoHeat pacers r next
Turkey pesto cranberry on rosemary foccacia, like Thanksgiving in a sammy :)
Goinng HAM On My Mom When She Aint Looking >>
If I get this right now, it's a sign. If I don't, oh well.
I love what you decided to wear! The shots are absolutely gorgeous. beautiful.
Chris went up against Rihanna & lost...duh...she bad! Way to go girl
Hm maybe I should hold off on the fire until the firemen across the street leave.
it is a terrible show
Ryan tried shading.
I think I have laundry detergent hives. Absolutely excellent.
Thank you and my regards to you too.
Great spirits have always encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds -
and I are in ur hood
Fears lose their power when you hold them up to the light of your consciousness. ~ Sanaya Roman & Duane Packer
Unreal!! How off the chain was that? Got George's tweet but could tell he'd had a few. You've been baptized!
don't open the door unless you want to feel the rush of the
Me too! Will you be back on campus next year?
Done, thank you! I can't wait!!! I've always wanted an iPad
you are too kind!! Let's catch up soon!!
See my cockers - Daisy is the one on the left, she has an eye infection, there's goop plus she has a hazy dot on her pupil
“Try to know everything of something, and something of everything.”
RFT ": If you can't make time for someone than they shouldn't make time for you."
bangladesh bangladesh bangladesh
Swimming with Wind is so weir, when you get out you feel so refreshed!
There was a prom in the museum visitor's center tonight. Would that seem cool to you in high school? My nerdy self would have loved it.
There is still hope for saving our nation from total moral decline. By voting the right way in all the elections in November
#RTHT no I was unaware of this shortcut, thanks for the heads up.
I mean, The drama was very entertaining 2 watch 4 a while but, I hope and puts the beef 2 bed and #KillIt :-)
I want to fulfill my dream of meeting u,since I can't work or go to school.It's something that I would really look forward to :)
You don't drown by falling in the water; you drown by staying there. ~ Edwin Louis Cole
Please note that I've changed from ClevPublicArt to cleveLANDstudio! sorry for the long absence - it's been crazy town around here!
I always find that brits weirdly overvalue gatsby. Not even fitzgerald's best. (but then my vote would be nabokov's pale fire)
plus I need to realize what I have and not what I want or dont have
RT : Didn't know this was possible. RT LeBron and D-Wade flat out dominated the 4th.
thank you so much you are such a life saver !!
I do my best, I do my best.
Didn't sleep the entire night. Gonna start on some last minute homework I guess -.-
got that right
Once I'm cool on u I'M COOL! I can ignore the fk outta anybody TRUST ME
no. I haven't. I'm going to red wings game tonight with the kids!! Yes on IMAX!!!
Lovely overdue lunch date with Amy Carson xx
my shower is my own personal recording studio....
Lakers falling apart here to end the damn quarter!
I don't think I could be dreaming, I felt your touch...
trophy Club going off tonight with DJ Pelkey on the ones and twos.. best mix of country and todays hits!
moose tracks...comes, of course. Ugh. We have a problem.
Yep - It was out for about an hour last night. Cut into my DVR time...LOL...Was trying to watch So You Think You Can Dance!
Fuck you Jews, we got Jesus
Nothing much, u? and i tried to trend that for like over 4 hours straight D: it had to be close to trending but it didnt :/
It's a self-chosen topic for an essay for school. Any examples + links + thoughts would be greatly appreciated! RT, too! <3
"you guys?" Do you follow ?
#tie2011, Go twitter newbies
Dear Ex, Just because I tolerate you, doesn't mean I want you back. Sincerely, We broke up for a reason.
Prague! Who's there? Who's going? Email me directly:
If you're on a budget maybe a rental license can do the trick?
Ladies Love Champagne | Join us this Thursday | Ladies text the word CHAMPAGNE to 38714 for Open Champagne Bar |
your tweets are so abusive and mental!
I sent you a reply, not sure if it went to you or not..still getting the hang of this twitter thing,but its a great shot of him
Varsity cheer :) #Relieved #Excited #CheerCamp #Can'tWait
I need to get the washing machine and my reading on the same cycle. It keeps buzzing in the middle of a chapter!
S/o to my new follower thanks for the follow
the store out there screwed me, so I had to come back
I'm pretty sure dropping LSD with Roger Sterling should go on everyone's bucket list.
hey, your record is skipping.
Thanks, Chris!
mhmm i may not be flawless but people love me :P lol <3
if only I had a desk! Instead of the dining room table.
thanks bro... Love getting to serve with you!
YOU ROCK, MAN!
Rugged and manly-- good choice :)
I thought I was being all virtuous with my paneer masala until I remembered paneer was cheese. Still delicious.
Ha, your posts are a half a day off?
Dear kitchen folk-who has an idea y my fryer wont kick on even w/pilot on? Flint issue? Just struggles 2 start & THEN jumps 2full throttle
- Love is UNCONDITIONAL. Love is KIND. Love is PATIENCE. Goodnight to u and sweet dreams. :-)
#VoteRNG AL NIGHT LONG!!!!
WELCOME HOME... AND HAPPY BIRTHDAY PRESIDENT OBAMA!
techno at the studio today with
Been reading George Saunders & have found my mantra (from "Winky"): I will not be the kind of person who craps in someone else's oatmeal.
My thoughts exactly!
Bryce Harper went yard again.
At Congo river about to putt putt it up.
Gm bro called you no answer where are you we need to round table
Watchmen gonna give me nightmares =/
hhmmm what is tonight's definition of "too much" wine...?
KNOW WHERE YOU CAME FROM; KNOW WHERE YOU’RE GOING (Jn 8:12) He who follows Jesus will not walk in darkness, but have the LIGHT OF LIFE amen
Picture This on ABC Family<3
You've sold me.
Nina was feisty! Thought it was great though, we're def all for getting equal opps for docs.. wanna see the 1st callers' too!
Hi, Greg! I can't make it 5/11 but pls tell me of future shows. Best: amarylliswriter at gmail
Just released CandySwipe update with "Friends Mode" now see your friends scores along side yours!
Sad news : BREAKING: CBS News confirms 7 Marines killed in helicopter collision near Yuma, Ariz.
fingers crossed!!
Fire alarm #2 in the first week!
as long as the chocolate fountain is working!! Haha!!
got some awesome tips from some cool canadians. thanks
Spring is almost here get those boat batteries charged,start planning those camping trips, and get a Power HotSpot from Solis Energy! Follow
Time to get ready to start my day. (2 more days until it's TGIF)
I second that!
Oh, excited to try the MARC express! Next stop, Baltimore! Downside: no Auntie Anne's pretzel-wrapped sausages & maple syrup.
RT : Animal Planet >
Also this sounds like too much fun (the Horizon Council event), especially given that is my old stompin' grounds!
All checked in and working on the first #SXSW task of the day: Food!
a lot of it. The woman didn't listen. I said shoulders, she went to my neck.
Ugh tyme flying
. Sunday Ticket promo comes out so soon after my install & they wont do shit about it. I would have waited or the install to get it!
Who's voting?! :D:D
He makes me happy <3
If you make a girl laugh, she likes you, but if you make her cry, she loves you.
Presentations are starting at #codeforoakland. 1st up: Oakwatch, neighborhood-level system for reporting incidents. Uses 6 mobile channels!
For the chant to work, you have to believe what you're saying! That's kind of an issue for #Royals fans at this point.
waiting for a special call :P ♥♥♥♥
r u serious rite now
Earlier Angelos told me to go to the back of the bus,
Searching far and wide for
Fuvking murder them RT : RT : Lakers have pushed their lead to 11. Kill. Them. Now.
next month... They're monthly. ;)
- I'm mom of teenager on ASD, showed her post, she said yeah - good talk 1 u trust, ride out these feelings go up down. Hugs
.: Here we come OSU. Battle for Ohio. UC
At least you can walk to class...sitting inside an office all day looking at the weather through the window is
Let's Go Badgers!
The juilliard jazz alumni orchestra re-takes the stage for the final two performances of the evening
Agreed. I think that's why more teams/leagues will get on this path.
Watching this heat gane
Dinner with the Parents!! Hillbilly victuals!!
The Heat are killing me. Softly.
It must've been love, but it's over now.
There's gotta be something wrong with me
Check out our new credit card machines debuting tomorrow at Olympic Pkwy!
Pardon our absence this weekend - there's this adorable blue train here and evidently he's pretty popular!
!(: Awhh Thank You Lover!(:
RT See U at Autism: The Musical TONIGHT! Where are they now? Q&A
I want to film a fan-film of the Hunger Games... Now I just need people. :P
CRASH: I-5 NB just north of Capitol- left lane blocked
why would my flight ever be scheduled on wednesday!! i have no life until my flight! and even worst no tv!! -_-
OMG! This movie is so hillarious! I'm like the loud one and Sheelby is totally the Fat one... but don't tell her LOL!
Brewers announcer just said "See if Ryan Braun can inflect [sic] a little juice into his team."
I'm hoping it ain't luck, it'll be skill that carries me and the new wave of "nexts" on the horizon. I wish you the best :)
I'd say the final one and when Michael saves Alex and she meets her-evil-self :)
"Yes, I'll take The Rapists for 300." "...That's Therapists..."
Dear Cupid, the next time you decide to shoot me with your freaking arrow....shoot him too.
Let's double-team this! Tag me in then jump in and start swinging the metal folding chair when no one is looking!
What a beautiful NITE in tha Chi Tonight!!!!
Only major hnds I lost with today where KK vs AK & KK vs AA...most plyrs go broke w KK vs AK earlier-guy had me covered. Lost minimum..
Tell me all the things you want to do.. I heard that you like the bad girls, honey, is that true?
too wasted to drive to MLK and 82nd is not a real Popeyes.
I remember.
Some people just choose to be negative..Maybe thats the main reason they'll neva succeed in Life!!!
via : Thanks for following! For more info on Tellox.net web hosting services and our special offers visit www.Tellox.net
via - Human Civilization Brings Out Worst In Area Man
so tired-______-time to go meemees...
I TWEETED ALL THE LYRICS AND NOT EVEN 1 RT OH WELL -__-
I'm back in 2 hours
pretty sure you're the best neighbor ever! Haha :)
What is with these outrageous no-calls?!
Yupperz :) <3 he actually does follow a lot of fans
Theres nothing I hate more then loosing the remote in my covers-_-.
Alan Kay on Ed testing: counting millions of rotten beans. #NITLE Montessori is the best.
Children of God don't let your lamps go out before the coming of Christ. Be ready for your your Bridegroom.
#2011RemindedMe To protect my iPod from thieves
screen printing all over prints tonight with a nice discharge ink and tagless neck tags for clients
.: If media owners want profit, should cover #occupysd. Top-read stories on
Weird. How many seasons now?
Sitting out on our new front porch enjoying the weather and a bottle of wine :)
Spent about an hour cleaning out who's following me and who I'm following. Making an effort to tweet more, stay more connected.
Good luck!
Sorry for the pause in posting. I was entranced by this video by the BH HS PTA. Just watch the first 30 seconds.
What's next in social media-- from new technologies to new trends. Panel discussion with San Diego Chargers, Brand Anywhere, Pechanga Casino
Retards these days
hahah I tried reading it slow and i couldnt do it! I had to just buzz through it although 17... i read as seventeen everytime
I hate dudes that think they know everything. Shut the fuck up
Golfing takes all of lifes stress away. Then gives the stress right back when you 3-putt a hole
Happy Sunday to everyone! Hope you're enjoying your day. Thank you for following #LintonAndAssociates on Twitter!
I wish they would speak into the mike better
"I tell you with certainty, tax collectors and prostitutes will get into God's kingdom ahead of you!" -Jesus
The blues and the abstract truth.
Sleepy... Going to go battle my insomnia once again...
well. guess I'll go sleep three hours then go to school. sounds like a blast. ahaha. 'gnight.
But she ain't messin with no broke nigga
"Guys, be quiet. I'm calling my mom!" *person in background* "PASS THE WEED!"
Happy that the district is closed
thank you
Also how were we not following and til now?
GO PACKERS!!! SUPERBOWL CHAMPS!!
As long as you know smh lol
haha I do too, don't get me wrong... just a funny observation.
Lord Thank You one Other Day!!! I Love You Father!!!
Screw car buying!b! So glad this isn't for me
SRSLY, who is going to Bellingham tonight? and are playing a top-secret house show!
were already winners as New Country Star of 2010! wut about sons of sylvia?! :O
When thinks she's cool cause she doesn't use Celcius like all the other Canadians <<<
ok ur point???
How nice! I usually just get another project. :)
the difference between naivete and idealism: the former, just seeing the good, the latter, seeing everything, but focusing on the good.
Live @ 8AM www.pdxsucks.com - 101 reasons you shouldn't do business with Eddie Van Halen
Still in shock about Junior Seau's death. It really is crazy what happens in life
Our mini sundae is the perfect sweet treat for you or your little ones. Or get a regular sized cookie or brownie sundae to share.
I wanna do THAT! Gotta get ME some of that! Gonna get, give, live, be...MORE!”―Danielle LaPorte
haha! Too funny ;)
very excited for a great day of learning at #litechsummit. is going to be showing off the brand new techbook in solutions room.
ah I can't right now... but I will later :)
Milkshake > Steve Blake
#PlansForTheSummer include blowing this clothing up, hanging with babes, traveling, rodeo, concerts, late night swims, and finding a queen
Thanks! And great work on your submission. We'll be holding another competition soon.
Our purpose is to consciously and deliberately evolve toward a wiser, more liberated and luminous state of being...Happy Saturday! :)
#random but I've been thinking that all morning
... Apparently it was who ever @/tinyari is!
Thanks for following back!
Sewn together but so broken up inside.
Thanks! Great post! “: Also thanks to for always have an open line of communication! Keep up the great PR work”
Agreed! RT : best. day. ever: on
Jake Bellows of Neva Dinova w/others & noelectro DJ set at Good Hurt, Venice, CA Oct 30th, Costume Contest/Champagne Table ftw
13 weeks of hell for a lifetime of pride, well worth it.
One glass of box wine and I'm speaking Dutch to my cat... Thursdays!
that's a shame. Merry Christmas by the way.
Of course, I'd need to buy a gun first. Maybe I should get on that....
Delores Hope, wife of Bob Hope, passed away today at the age of 102
I just wanna live while I'm alive
I wonder who has the power to greet a nice Steelers Fan with field passes for sunday nights game?
In New Orleans at ABA meeting next week; should be interesting hearings on technology-related changes to ethics rules.
9 more days and I'm off to see the Nutcracker at the theatre! :)
little does she know who my ass really is. Guess you could call me a pretty little liar. I think yes! KISSES! -D
#DailyQuote: "All of the animals except for man know that the principle business of life is to enjoy it." - Samuel Butler
the hell dude??!
i havent forgot! im trying to find a local band on the lineup because its always betr to help a local band.
Almost at 2,000 tweets, oh my.
Oh sweet rooster sauce of my heart.
Thank you for following & Welcome
GOOD MORNING I HOPE THIS IS THE DAY YOU FOLLOW ME :D
Sounds exactly like what developers said in Palm Desert w/ the Larrea St project (killed) & now the Rosewood Hotel.
- GoogleOffers is coming. BUT! #Burghbargains is here! www.burghbargains.com. Why wait?
Thanks bud!
Love the idea of Pinterest in a library context.
happy 18th birthday !
. kicks of software patents panel at #innact. How to move forward on a complex issue when Cong is patent exhausted?
Awesome #FF #S/O! I hope your week starts off amazing.
ima hit you up in a lil bit bro... Im at the movies
Unfucking believable. Caps blew it
:) how is everyone today?
Yippee! Landed 45 mins early on Friday night on
I member being in the"friend zone" it had good things bout it until i fel in love wit my bestfrend now hes the best thing thts hapend 2 me(:
If you don't need phone strategy & you don't need email strategy, do you need a social media strategy? It's just the way we do business now.
Yeah me too, i love him as a writer and vocalist. I hear hes back with Soil and left Drowning Pool. Osm.
sorry wasn't near phone. Glad getting him checked out. So hard to know what caused spasms
Jennifer Hudson Family Murder Trial: Closing Arguments From Prosecution Begin
have fun 
Really? Then you must be doing it wrong.
Used the racquetball technique on my hamstring last night. It hurts worse than ever now but the pain moved. That's positive I think
#heartshapedhands to all of our followers! you people are the cat's pajamas! the bee's knees! 100% awesomeness! enjoy your valentine's day!
i love my spurs. love em love em love em. ♥
Fina hit the night life might not make it home lol I do it
Can You Plz Follow Me And My BFF Becuz It's Our B-Day On April 28 And Were Both Taurus's & We Love U Guys Alot
Huge win in Ram Dome last night pushes #13 Rams to 18-4 on the season.
EIC : "We're getting killed guys...we continue finishing newspaper after very long, stressful, un-fun nights."
are you still making guitar picks? Found a few cards while cleaning.
aww I bet you made that girl's day :) so sweet
ariana is our cupcake? is it just me or do the tt's get more awkward everyday?...
RT anyone at #ward5 advisory meeting, let me know if you need toothpicks to poke in your eyes from boredom. It was pretty good!
im just going to go to bed!
It doesn't look like much and it's never that busy, but Punjab restaurant on bryant and 24th is awesome. eat there
Hai. So tonight's the boys FIRST AMERICAN COHEADLINING TOUR. I mean, nbd or anything.
- OMG...we're leaving for Vegas in 9 hours.. ;)
Congrats and thanks to all those trained to save lives. RT Looks like I got my first code save. On a co-worker, nonetheless.
Good one ": Lemons contain more sugar than strawberries"
#AskScandal do I believe this chick??
See y'all after the #RedSox game tomorrow night at Who's On First #Boston for some sweet sweet rock&roll! Come say hi to T.O.M!
Love my Chapter. Hate Steve Harvey.
You guys are right, 360 MP servers down right now. Campaign it is!
Thomas Sears worked with Reynolda off and on for 40 years. Museum archives hold many images, sketches, and more.
Fuck I'm board
Things are still rather hectic and crazy busy for me Paul. Hope everything is well with you sweetie. Thanks for your support! XO
And this day seems like it's about a week long
RT : RT : Leading people via processes & not mentoring is like feeding a baby via instructional DVD.
Ever wondered why Venntive doesn't have an Integration Partner page? Because Venntive is a *complete* platform w/ deep data integration.
Maybe since Dirk is still solid, but we'll miss having a center that good. This team was stuck with Shawn Bradley for 7 years
No, I try to work SMARTER, not HARDER, and show it off. "Do you stay late at work to prove you're pulling your weight? " "
what are you doing?
I just saw a kid with a "I'm not Irish, but I'm getting lucky tonight" t-shirt. I don't think I have ever hated a human more in my life.
NYC runners-- I need fun running routes, visiting the city this weekend & can't wait to explore!!!
Send your reject steak to me please. Postmark: My Face. Steakface.
me a flirt?? Never lol
Can't wait to get back in the gym soon
LOL. The hat and the crustache only make it better. You think this guy is comfortable? #TheNewYorker Hotel Lobby twitpic.com/69my01
awesome...congrats on the #kayaking!
I ended my birthday well what a night !!;);)
You think your special? HAHAH
Marble Slab Creamery® and MaggieMoo&#39;s Ice Cream & Treatery® Issues &quot;Yo-bate&quot; Giveaway to Sweeten Tax Day
Intro to ghost hunting class wed April 13th from 7-9PM
why? Seems like a good way to shrink the size of government.
#sorry about one of your Ice Sculpture
Pray to God but continue to row to the shore. - Russian Proverb
We can't wait to see what has to say on tonight's #hotelimpossible. Seriously addicted.
Fave spots in Berlin? I'll have a day there tomorrow before I keynote at TrendForum conference there. Thank u for any tips!
Lol. I Know, But Can't Do Much On A Broken Foot, Which Is Why I'm So Angry "/
English project can suck my dick
Yes for WAKA signups! RT Grand Opening is tomorrow!! Will we see you there?!
#teamfollowback Help me get more followers!
Thanks. That's what I suspect. Trainers think "They won't listen until they know who I am."
I Love Put Your Hearts Up! <3 ahh I just LOVE it! <3 <3
At the 43rd District Democrats listening to a panel on a proposed ordinance about felons' access to rental housing
are.you.going.to.come.out.with.more.clothing.designs? ***yeaya***
“: am i the only one who feels like christmas never even happened?” no, i am too
it is a pretty bad game. But what about monday night raw?
'Sorting through the bills, fan mail, and life threats. Wondering why the postman ain't delivered my wife yet...'
Yo this lady at the restaurant is deadass negotiating on her foods price like a contract. Wow!!!
Things to-do: A.) Grab a coffee at B.) Visit Idle Time Books at noon for the #DCCashMob C.) Have a swell day!
Let the people rise up and hack. Tonight (July 1) at the Node, 7:30PM. Bring your projects.
. Thanks Pawl... ITS MY TURN &Every Since I LANDED N LA Its been the #NOPLAYGAMESRULE WIT ME FRM DAY 1
already following u
Tough decisions and sacrifices must be made but not on the backs of our kids. Advocacy Summit
That's right! Awesome deal...thanks, ! RT : UT Alumni can get 30% off tickets to the Biltmore! YES!
I just finished a 2.95 mi run with Nike+ GPS.
I hope Ellis swoops down on a chandelier and takes out Karen, like in Phantom of the Opera.
haha she must be talking bout some other Aaron lol
#FIREIRELAND #miamidolphins Hire mr Suarez his team is #undefeated in #madden ;-)
do u think i spend my time stalking u & copying ur tweets
Today Dean Milano will play a free rush hour concert! Classic American folk music at its best!
If anyone is looking for an entry level accounting job (min 2 yrs acctg exp) in Madison, or know someone...let me know!
Done with my economic finals :)
Overheard at the office: "Did you put my labbit on my mouse?" cc:
To my followers #thanks for all the #FF happy weekend for Y'all !!!
I know yous like my chemical romance
#RISDPHONATHON caller just spoke to an alum at the Michael Graves Design Group. Really cool to speak to someone from such a big company!
The height of AP season is upon us. Stress for teachers & students is the order of the day. Study, study! Tell them they will be successful.
so find someone who watches the show. not like you are surrounded by 30,000 people or anything ;)
S/O Foundation Supa Producer ... #ItzAlleyway2Broadway Datz Why We Makin Classics
what I feel for is more than "Love" it´s admiration!
Agility or search-and-rescue training are extremely good ways to mentally stimulate, some dogs
Congrats ! Correct! Derek jeter and ruben rivera played for the !
thanks for the follow handsome....
So annoyed!
I'M A COUNTRY STATION/ I'M A LIL BIT CORNY
Who are you?
Well 4 is good enough;)
but if u buy one every week its like getting it done anyway
Beez In The Trap
When my doctor said this 4 day medicine would cause some #insomnia she wasn't lying!
Photos of me right now are a little "alien-looking" so I'll wait to post a pic until I'm more developed. #GMP4 yes I just hashed my sign off
I can't stay here anymore.
Looking a hot mess and niggas still try to get my #. Maybe cause of my big ass. Lol
Thanks! ;) Elementary Algebra... I don't think I passed it the first time around... in the 90s! :)
We'll do it for the next one!
u know who they are?
I MISS THOSE CLASSES IT MAKES ME SAD :( im so sick </3
My sincere condolences to the ENTIRE Houston family, from the family of Marvin Gaye! ♥
We have the happiest little think helping us!! She is smiling so much it makes me want to smile!!😂
Give thanks to the most high for another year. Wishing all many blessings and lots of love!
Life style I live on that channel
Back at #AEA ready for some workshops!
If your kids don't pay attention to you in public, don't get mad. Chances are, they don't listen to you at home either!!
#ShaneBatteir is on BeastMode as well. Taking charges and Hitting 3's like its all good.
In Kalamazoo to work for !! (even the craptastic weather hasn't dimmed my excitement)
I used to think the Cameron Crazies were the most annoying basketball fans. #Kentucky has them beat.
Daaammn!!!! Why no love for my Skins??
Finalizing something! That's my goal, too.
after attempting to make and edit a movie with Microsoft products has again realized the superiority of the iUniverse
Koobface Gang That Spread Worm on Facebook Operates in the Open
“: Thoughts on NASM vs ACE cert? anyone?” doesn't ACE require degree in that field?
Teeheee. Right ?! Using a lint roller for a vaccume.
Feeling bad today . who will chat with me i am so boring
- Was this the Seattle location? Did they make up for the wait?
Shout out to , one of the raddest dudes we know. Thanks for making the world more aesthetically pleasing and for yr support!
TONIGHT WERE GONNA BE AT BROADWAY BAR !!! $1.75 BUD LIGHT ALL NIGHT IN THE MIX 21+ ONLY !!! RELAXED DRESSCODE
I have been up since 7 am and I can't fall back to sleep.
I'm not doing good you want to know why I don't have a fucking job t
Nope! I'll check it out on demand later though. And don't all you men in NY have stylists???
It's Super Saturday. The Clasico kicks off at 3pm Central. Barcelona vs Real Madrid. Can be seen on GolTV.
Hyflex course design
haha yes because i have a life and i don't tweet as much as you do. hahahahahaha
Chapter complete. Biographic info sent. Books on the shelf (in Japan) mid-March.
they're singing Hit the Lights in my advisory omg
did MSU at least represent well? I'm an MSU soccer slum, so hoping they did. Good game all round?
So whats on your agenda today?
#Staging tip#14 luv thy neighbor, let them know u r putting ur #house on the #market, they may just know someone intrstd n byng ur home!
omg why are you so close to my home?!
Thanks for the mention!
Just read CA Tech's case study - The Journey to Launch OneCA - feel like I finally have a direction for our soc media strategy
Sad for Milan and with the players leaving, nxt season will prob be tough too.
Practice tommorrow with new clean singer. Oh and 4 pa systems. Time to lift the roof off this bitch :D
Drunk people seem so annoying when you're not one of them.
i need to get high so bad :/
Only 6 days away! We will see you in Denver, check these exhibitors out -
Im From 0the Mil So you know i got Bucks
Up...abt to get on the road!!
Good luck with release today! I will be trying, Should be fun.
Sounds good, the 5:00pm shouldnt be as crazy as the 9:00am one. A lot of people are dealing with finals lol
I'm watchin Day After Tomorrow after #ufc145 if I'm still awake
Need another bottle of wine......
yeah I didn't do shit. Me and luigi were tryna leave the whole time.
has her Project Puppeteer hat on today.
Big thanks to for developing #CRPT and Manatee Village Hist Park for use of facility and City of #Bradenton for access to cem
Late for whom? Everyone doesnt live by the 9-5 life. Open late Open early is relative. DC no small town.
Text from my sister, 1st year junior doc working nights at 6am BST. "OMG my patient set fire to himself to burn off bandages, on my ward"
home from library outreach event. read books and talked about summer reading program with darling kids and their parents. *my favorite part*
NO ONE SAYS NO TO BIG BEN!
Do you remember when they wrapped Kit Kat bars in foil?
On a mission to retweet all of 's tweets(:
Gave out free t-shirts outside of the Q. People went nuts. Thanks for the list and support!
To be a directioner you DONT have to know everything about them and you DON'T have to watch their videos all the time GEEZ!!!!!
where r u from?
Freakin good night last night with colorguard(:
Life is good!:-) had a great day/week..
Austin's coming back to New York!!
They seem so far back from the stage RT How can the buyers even SEE? #FashionStar -- DKNY PR GIRL® ()
Call Me Fool !
Oh you love him and it's been a week.? You guys are gonna last forever.
good morning
No, Pico was the last health reporter we had. We still do some health stories, but it's usually something pretty specific.
Excited about Business #Incubator moving closer to a reality in
Lac La Biche foster care boss gets bail on porn charges - CBC.ca
Sis you got so much you oozing.... I'm learning from U..
Congrats to COTELCO research associates graduating this weekend! We're extrememly proud!
Tim already was, dont understand why people and the media dont understand that. People = Shit
In need of a gluten free cocktail? Try our signature Upstairs Martini - a mix of , Dolin Dry Vermouth and a twist.
Thanks Lois! Good Chatting #brandchat :
World Cup pairings announced: US grouped with Slovenia, England and Algeria.
I don't know. Jackson already complaining about his contract. I hope you are right
Omer Asik of the Bulls looking like former Bulls big man Jawaan Oldham on that last blocked shot!
At representing Atari, looking for games to buy!
Consider us there promise!
Anyone at the Magic show in Las Vegas?
If your horny, Let's do it Ride it, My Pony My saddle's waiting Come and jump on it
I LOVE that show!
yes!! and he always does lol tho sometimes with complaining
Thank goodness! RT "We're back on Friday. 6.30pm on "
thnx! Follow?me?
This guy next to me is eating a pancake with chopsticks. Didn't even know that was possible. Confused on so many levels.
Dear mystery blood sugar disorder: go away and die. Two sips of Italian soda and already a migraine? Bite me.
RT : RT The person who says it cannot be done should not interrupt the person doing it.*
Bin Laden said Biden would be out of his league as President. Wow. Al Queda views Biden as a weakness of America. Know what? He's RIGHT.
I own 167 songs of Kanye West. What up.
Im so bored i cld do homework. Damn
How you get so many?
Come see us at We are relaunching a Virginia winery and thus have a bit of a different story to tell.
Snackity Snack time.....SAMOSAS instead of a bag of chips is always the way to go!!!
please use the door bell.
Happy Emancipation Day, DC, and Happy Sesquicentennial, DC Emancipation.
I agree ^^
This is the beginning...And just as one has a chance of winning the lottery if one buys all the tickets, there is the chance of an end.
Dear Kory, Let me be totally honest, you're on the naughty list. It wasn't even a close tie. Better luck next year, Love Santa
Poor walk on's, lol
Don't use a machete at night.
Another day of driving on the #JNGtour, looking forward to seeing Joel of !
#SomethingImScaredOf is losing the strength to push away the problems I have and losing the ability to smile through the pain, like I do now
What's the deal with the Mondrian tonight? How does this work?
Be yourself (unless yourself sucks)
omg! today just got so much better. thx for the shout-out on the #socialshopper!
#ThoughtsDuingSchool when's lunch?
It's a film about a woman trying to track down her lover all over Madrid that's been avoiding her & about 2 skip town w/ another...
from earlier convo w Bill, sounds like there are some required patches to trunk
Lmao»» ": first off, is you a Nigga or a Bitch? "
Bust outta work and into happiness! Our Happy Hour is happening now! Enjoy 1/2 off drinks in our snazzy new Foshay pint glasses!
#Top100Lies "That was my last piece of gum"
u in the studio with Big Sean?
Thanks to all podcast listeners who have written! Will respond individually; pardon the delay. Wishing all a happy and healthy New Year.
Catechin, one of the bitter ingredients in green tea, has been shown to kill food poison bacteria and minimize toxin produced by these bugs
true , i use to have that problem . that can mess things up lol
My Major Doesnt Make A lot of Money...Hmph Well 64,000 a Yr Isnt enough For Me I Need atleast 8Figures a Year.
Thanks for following !
Having a pretty good day!! Gonna sing n finish my songs :-) :-) :-)
Hit me up I'll join the league
There's something about cooking breakfast that's just jumpstarts your day. Oat bran waffles with pecans and sausage. Breakfast of champs.
unclear, but was at Red Farm last night...which did. Not. Suck.
You are most welcome!
I want to be your choice, not your option.
We want to know: What's your idea for the next big website?
Of your wife and your tried friend believe nothing but what you know for certain. - Spanish Proverb
i come back and its like dead.. sure i see how it goes
is sponsoring the Revolt Summer Surf Series event in PB this weekend! Come check out the action all day Saturday & Sunday at Crystal Pier!
Oh my lord...
How did you get so darn SEXY!!!!
Why no more Flickr?
Another sunny day in sactown..
i'm sorry to hear that
What the hell is Knudson talking about?
R. I. Paradise Janie C. Brew. Definitely a sad day!
Still #YOTTO gotta get to the playoffs so the beast can show up in Dallas
that would've been a bargain! a total downer
RT : you were fantastic!! Well done!!
RT : For short video, I think it would be good to just make one point.
You know me better than that son. My Mavs fandom shan't be shaken, tis built on solid ground.
Just dropped Bill Harley off at the airport, now I am off to Second Sunday Storytellers at the Glendale Library, 2 - 4 p.m. Hope to see you!
The first oopsy of the day. DOH!!!
I doubt that Mayweather vs Pacquiao will ever happen. Mayweather doesn't have the balls to do it.
Getting ready for our show in Wichita KS. Friday. at Kirbys beer Store.
hello my little beliebers (:
Majority of actors have PASSION for the acting, but they need DIRECTION to get to use that passion in the industry.
Greendale vs. City College softball game
My biological clock must be ticking because I can't stop thinking about kittens.
I woke up with Devandra Banhart's "Lover" in my head. I'll probably be singing it all day now. Totally ok with that.
only if you got the right condiments.
I saw it. Very cool.
I am ready for them. I was following you and I think i mistakenly unfollowed you when I messaged you. Sorry.
Bounce that ass shake that ass like the twerk team , hair long ass fat shawty mean.
good morning y'all...
Good Morning Houston! Houston Press would like to send you to see Kaiser Chiefs tonight at House of Blues - just come by & get ur tix!
There is nothing as deceptive as an obvious fact.
oops only windows supported
an anti-endorsemnt, does that mean you pay them?
Did you get your #GoButler Gift at Chick-fil-A today? Nearly 200 people had a free lunch after making a basket!!
RT : According to reports Dick Clark, the famous TV host has died from a major heart attack... RIP Dick......
If you have to wear a shirt that claims you have "swag" then you probably don't have swag after all.
on the hunt for eco-friendly finds for the HOME for 944's December Gift Guide — furniture, kitchen ware, etc. Email ideas to !
you know I will want to do something
suck me Nani !!!! BAILZ PAGLIACCI IS THE GREATEST RAPPER TO EVER LIVE !!!!!
lol who do you think? Nah, I was gunna use my backyard and drive some into the field back there.
Dance party to call me maybe from across hall with We have issues.
Art for AIDS followed by Folsom Street Fair followed by our first anniversary = good weekend.
Stay tuned for our new single coming out Soon! Go to dsdsq2.com for remixes and new dance tracks.
I think people, in general, are way too afraid to make mistakes
Glad you like it! Thanks for the kind words.
Haha neither...I think you accidentally walked right in front of the camera because all I could see was your face!
Sadly Drew...
Ohh , your cute 💜 && what you just told me is even cuter💜😊 Lol
Stop by our shop at 3931 ! We have some delicious flavors, including Dark Chocolate Sea Salt and Chocolate Peanut Butter!
March has finally come! *Prepares self for the army of awesome new albums to take charge*
oh geez, r u still going to the parties tonite?
I've been tasked with creating videos. I'm all about it. As long as I can join the fun, let's DO IT!
Can't be true.
'Tis the season of Madai. Japanese Red Snapper can live up to 30 years and gets it's bright red skin from a diet of shrimp.
College Football Saturday! Will Michigan show up or get blown out? What's your take on this one?
Everyone's getting Lei'd here today!
Happy travels to and !!
i really want those 2nd row tickets for 700 hmm.
Xmas Tweet: Mom trying to compare our family to the Kardashians.
It's my birthday twitches! :)
Wow somebody jus paid for my chili's dinner... God bless to who ever did that for me!
Got out of school early today because the heat index for today was 120-130! lol.. the only good thing about the midwest.
TMB=the munch bunch. Yes. Women's networking group
That sucks. I truly had my hopes up.
Walking home from practice and the first thing I do after opening the door is strip.
anyone think to look up the address on their website?!?!
I love yours Shhhh
Yeah it is a little weird.
I take u to NYC with me and this is the thanks I get?! I don't think so! This is not happening again and your not coming back to my house!!!
okay:) but isn't his birthday august 26th?
garowenet thanks for following me on Twitter!
great stuff just used the mandolin on some citrus for my new drink dispenser. Thanks
#ReplaceAGagaSongWithTwitter Came up with this: Bloody Twitter, Ameritwittero, Dance in the Twitter. Still gonna Marry the Twitter.
Don't waste your time giving people second chances, when there is someone out there waiting for their first.
RT : Sometimes the Past comes back arnd 2 teach us a lesson we missed the 1st time. Learn from it then let it go.
Yep! Ive been watching since I was really young lol
At sharp 5PM CST today, I promise to shut my laptop and go to sleep!
2011.10.13 #Brewers 4 #Cardinals 2 | Series even up / Wolf starts; Axford finishes / fans may exhale now
it's been great! Loved meeting you and look forward to chopping it up some more with you!
Im requesting all girls to put up a profile of them with no makeup so we can see what they really look like. None of us guys are sporti...
Also, some big and exciting changes for us next season, which is our 5th anniversary season.
I'm glad I had the day off so I could do accounting for free all day.
Not having a great day. I hope this gets better. I NEED it to get better.
It's a good thing I'm not following AND have his mobile notifications turned on x_x #ItsOkayThough P.L.U.R.<3
Good Morning!
Miley cirus hates twillight.......I think I just became a miley fan!
Geri! How the heck are ya? Long time!! Thanks for the RT. Let's catch up soon.
Out of context, "Stop, collaborate and listen" is actually REALLY good advice.
That's 11 in the books. King 2, Churchill 2. If King wins, they'll have to play at least seven more.
My only #FF are these awesome
"Thanks for giving me a fresh start & for all your help." -V.S. Happy clients make it all worthwhile!
Is she really your twin? Or a friend that looks and acts like you?
See you Friday night!
Been missing out on the #MiddayMix on getting my ears ready for the #FridayMix with & :)
please tell me when your coming to florida?? I got people to buy all the rage. I listen to it every day! I love u, ur my idol<3
RT : were u at now battle -- Ft Carson.. U in the guard still?
Currently listening to: Rickey Lee Watson - Bottom of the Bottle
lol well i have to go to bed ttyl
I'm so busy all the time that I'm really bad at doing nothing.
The leaked memo is also real.
I vote for the pink wig AND the tiara, you brave and smart girl! It's going to grow back and you're going to grow and teach us.
The homemade potato chips were so good yesterday, that today we're making sweet potato chips. Yummy! Fat free, too!
Right now: catch the last set of #SXSW at the Firehouse Lounge!
I am thankful for this day.
THANK YOU for reminding me that exists!
A winter storm warning has been issued for Bexar and several surrounding counties due to the possibility for freezing precipitation.
#schoolmemories asking to go to the restroom to walk around and kill Time
10,947 @ rose garden. Sell out!
I'm finally going to bed. Goodnight ~
i believe that if beliebers work together we can trend. #followjerry for what do you say? WHOS IN? <3
Wow really bruh? SmhRT : ": RT : Phone so dry right now... Sprinkle a lil water on it bruh" lol
Not being able to fill orders fast enough is a good problem to have, right?
I didn't get much done. I kept getting distracted. lol I got all the corner squares and sashes cut out and the top row sewn.
I would not catch no grenade for your hoe ass.
How about this Tuesday at 6:15 pm at The Bowl?
What question would you like to ask the #Tarot? Bring it to www.shindigtarot.com and find a perfect reader for your question!
Preparing for my Saturdays filled with hair
Thank you! <3 ": #FF A label which should get more followers ;)"
We driven & I'm tryna figure out why my son wants me to keep replayin track#7 on the cd! By gosh he likes it!
Like this Status if you are enjoying your weekend! We are so excited to share our new promo this Monday!
You'd think after 10 years, Microsoft, just out of pure guilt would either get its shit together or jump off a tall building.
I got certified in Excel by the Microsoft Office User program a hundred years ago...no idea where you can enroll but you should look
Larry Scott: Sport is the only thing on TV that is still getting a major live TV audience versus DVR audience.
clearly you know your NY food spots...you gotta come out to BK though, get some real Italian food! Lol
Looking for an expat position in Singapore
Thanks for the RTs/mentions!
Sometimes you'll never know the true value of a moment until it becomes a memory.
yeah I noticed that. A little weird.
RIP Adrienne Rich. Remembering a pleasant afternoon several years ago drinking tea and buying books at her house. A lovely woman.
Have you had a burger yet today?
<--- Thought not one of the "smart" ones.
NEW BEATS ON DECK!!!!!! #rap #hiphop #pop #RnB #twerk #jazz....whatever type #beat u need...i got'em
Ah, #Chopin in the morning.
Thanks lady! I just saw this... I didn't get to see you, but you always look AH MAZING.....
Staying home just because I have a bad stomach ache...
Economic relief coming Obama signed Home Buyer tax credit motivated buyers will get great values Now is a great time to buy or sell
look at the photo I just posted man. Nothing wrong with the act of course, but for a front page cover... Idk
We thank all of you who have shown us gratitude!
great fight. I miss those types of matches.
Monday is the perfect day for happy hour! Consider it "training camp" for Monday Night Football:)
Sorry if i havent been tweeting so much...been so damn busy. Going to N.H. on Saturday!!
Its gonna take me awhile to get use to my new glasses lol
You're being a great mother to your kids. They'll appreciate it later! Happy Mother's Day!
LOL. Love this! ": The more ppt slides you have, the less you know about your topic. #whatsnextdc"
Great defense by Memphis. Both Gay and Allen played that perfectly.
The class of 2016 scoop. Go check out at m14hoops.com. Names of notable players. This class will be ranked after the M14 October showcase.
lol naw son my tv is not gonna break but y'all gonna be like us at the end of the year with no ring
kenzdoll collin wants to know if you can send me the link to conner youtube video please
Oh NO! Aaron BarRAZA has 7 ENDORSEments already. El Paso Stonewall YD's, Sheriff, Police, Border Patrol, Tejano, CLEAT.
for the articles. Why else?
Hearing #StormWarning on the radio just makes it so much more real that I'm seeing tonight!!!!! :)
A little behind on Up All Night. Loved the Valentine ep and "no on the coin slot!"
Tonight feels like a good night for an Upstate Deluxe Pizza…..what’s on your plate?
LOL - I just saw your tweet about the bus times..you'll love the app. It tracks buses to about 5 minutes with GPS.
as the black people say "KMSL" (which means "killin myself laughing")
Enjoying case presentations from students w Good luck students in Chicago and at NAIOP Minneapolis.
listenting to The Roots #HIGO brilliant
Why are all my post-patch Conquest games so empty? Used to be full all the time, but this afternoon/evening usually half empty.
Hi how are you? Thanks for reaching out...
I'm watching you.
are you at the JazzFest?
done and done! send 'em on up! I want furry little things to keep me warm!
Poised Creation is on the look out for great videographers! If u can cut a deal, hollar at us!
Which reminds me, I really need to either empty the Nikon or just go buy a new camera card.
has mighty fine taste.
Art Gala Event "Your Loved One Has Got the Art Talent. Deadline 8/20 for submissions. All welcome loved ones with cognitive conditions.
You don't know how hard it is not to talk to you, you're my bestfriend, and I hate these fights </3
bo burnham <3
George Ault's Daylight at Russell's Corners is astonishing - stark, clean, beautiful.
Everyone and they momma out to eat tonight
Going to visit Mom at the Bristal in Westbury later today
Can you follow back?????
This fucking cookie jar my grandma got.... Looks like it could get up and kill us all, o.O
I'm down to just create an entirely different magazine called "Models and Donuts". With you on the cover!!
If He's keeping you from doing something, it means He has a bigger plan for you. Just be patient, GREATER things are to come!
lololol stop it Heath stop it!! LMAO LMAO you're killing me!! hahahahahahaha..congress do something,,now THAT's funny!!!
I just feel like watching Sailor Moon right about now!
won last nite. Flying out to L.A. Today for game w Dorsey. Flight delayd so we drove. Arrived @ 215 played @ 230 loss by 4
RT hit me back.
Wrapping up the weekend with the
it actually does...
I've wondered the same thing too but at the end of the day just gotta realize its their loss!
Why would most of #TeamMindless get mad because the girl Twerked on Him-_- wow! I would of did it to, I mean Prod? ;)
We need to set up a date...Color Run May 19th...come get painted. Team
Odds on a possum every night in this run and great to see that Trey has got the memo from me that flannels are in
Americans have celebrated summer's unofficial end since 1882, when the holiday began as a single street parade in New York City
You need to be well hydrated before you even start your run. If you start partially dehydrated, it only gets worse from there.
she's rooting for the New Orleans "miners" right?
Crappit. My laptops dying again... talk to you later peeps. I love you. Alot. Even if you dont love me back :-)
Apparently, I've been released by the Colts.
Is YES!!!! Chant bigger than WHAT chant?
pretty much its huge, but i love it! Everyone keep asking me "what the heck is that" lol!
near durham
Mark your calendar for 's #MuseoSpark chat on 5/17: Museums in a Changing World: New Challenges, New Inspirations.
I agree. Staged.
--Adolf Hitler to Reichstag, 30 Jan 1937, as translated by Norman H
Stop by our booth at #aspa2012 an mention this tweet for a free gift!
i'm testing. :) what a novice!
RT : : World change happens when ordinary people have extraordinary determination ~
carly if you read this.. do the right thing
It's great that you're going to get to go! :)
Bad habit: Starting important emails and thinking I hit send, only to discover hours later they're behind my mail window.
GDIs, we can recognize you. Get out out of our party
Not this time :) free tickets with friends to a Macallan tasting party.
I just love Brad Paisley :)
Its nice to be aware of how to regroup whenever needed. As long as you're mentally tough, the rest is cake.
If you don't believe in yourself, no one else will.
Im such a little kid, Im all excited that we're at the zoo cx !!
Punt. Punt. Punt. GOOSE.
the terreculas show starts at 705 tomorrow. Y'all go easy on him LOL
I saw a homeless man and asked him his story. I stopped to ask him his story, cried and gave him $100. Happy thanksgiving.
Doing last minute laundry and packing before we leave tomorrow.
RT "Cartlandia" on SE 82nd becomes city's & state's 1st food cart pod granted annual license to sell beer/wine
No reentry at the pirate game? Haha thats why i left and that bitch let me back in hahah
#etech ETech needs a new revolution to ride. I don't see any bomb-throwing anarchists, and that's bad.
and guys who say differently?
Lookin for a old fashioned lookin bar for scene in our next music video Anyone have any ideas?
You craftlaunch site looks great. Let us know if we can help or if you have any questions!
omg we're so close! yes, indeed. when i get back we MUST!
what a beautiful day
Baby you light up my world like nobody else , the way that you flip your hair gets me over whelmed <3
I wish, but this isn't a business expense.
says you once stuck your hand up a cows ass, is that true ? 🐮
Ty Jason for following
will keep you all in my thoughts. *hugs*
but I Imagine they aren't fans of Long Johns.
No problem, can't wait to check it out! RT : thanks for referring to !
what's wrong?
I'm having a great night. I'm putting some thoughts on paper.. that is one of the keys to follow through.
I just wanna smack them !
will there be an app for #CILDC Computers in Libraries conference?? hoping so...
I'm two time zones behind, but your tweet makes me think it was Lana Del Ray...
how's FL?
hey, and good job staying off Twitter. Didn't think you would
Send Courtney homeShe may have said sorry but you don't know her like the girls do!Lindsay is actually really beautiful&humble
yes!! how about Aruba or Aspen? planning this #elopement is sounding good.
The TBS announcers keep saying a potential game 5's start time is TBA. Is this true?
i'm going to sleep ... i don't care if its barely 9. this weather makes me sleepy.
Zoo director tells budget committee that Angelenos on the Westside think the zoo is in San Diego; city doesn't have $ to market zoo.
movie did not disappoint :)
This Weekend. Well Its basically being a good little girl and Studying & homework!:D
RIP #DiscoQueen #DonnaSummer. I will forever have memories of #skating parties and #DonnaSummer music playing
Again, enough hand wringing, bring on actual alignment topics
Good job North Carolina voters... 12yo and 1st cousins can get married the sanctity of marriage is safe.
1/2" diameter hail reported at Princeton High School (Green Lake Co.)
I so totally agree.
i'm a huge slut having never tried it ;)
#njdevilssuck that's ok hunny.the devils are coming to our house.ill save you a seat by the exit
HEY BFF
I adjusted the list last night by using the site you suggested. What is next?! :)
i don't even know how i do it! haha
Happy New Year!! Make it the best yet!
standup tonight at
Thank you for everything! You are an amazing inspiration to us. Best of luck in the
This video contains content from The Orchard Music, WMG and Ultra Records (MVR), one or more of whom have blocked it (cont'd)
A man can't ride your back unless it's bent. - Martin Luther King, Jr.
The other event I really want to attend is SMX Advanced Seattle...or maybe PubCon in Vegas :)
we know
Josh Jones Latin Jazz Ensemble Cigar Bar & Grill : Sat., November 27, 9:00pm
what movie?x
Welcome to the southern tier of WNY. I didn't know you would be in the neighborhood. One of my colleagues is attending.
I'm living twenty minutes from Philadelphia! What's goin' on with the 99% in Philly???
Knowing youre sad makes me sad, knowing i cant do anything to make you feel better :/
Validating the oral-systemic health connection
Prepping for tonight's first preview of NEXT at HERE!
thanks. Have an awesome day
If you don't drive your business, you will be driven out of business. - B. C. Forbes
#nowplaying drop the world - lil wayne and eminem :)
Best Dunk Title acceptance speech ever was , who thanked his Mom, Jesus, and the Dallas Cowboys cheerleaders.
SO JEALOUS!
I want to go home, get in bed, and never get up.
Bearcats lost 2-1 to Weatherford College tonight by a walk off Home Run .
thank you, it was an amazing experience
#WSP I'm not alone... Driving song...
I fuck with Tyga but he has so much haters.
Milwaukee Rally Hotel pkg. includes 2 tix to Harley Museum, breakfast, parking, welcome bag, overnight accom. www.marriott.com/mkeri
Nokia Lumia 900 Review: Best Windows Phone So Far
observation: anything called "upscale" is usually (apologetically) trashy.
Love and happiness:)
I hate a superficial females
Happy 2nd Birthday to my little cousin Aden! I love you boo boo! Hope you have a good one! See you later! (:
Happy New Years Eve!!
I need to do a better job of keeping track my tax deductions!
I'm not "boy crazy" I'm just crazy for this one boy<3
Let's go Red Sox!
Welcome to the twitter We're happy to see you.
In Lynchburg, VA waiting for to arrive so we can experience the place I didnt know existed until 4 weeks ago
The Texans team bus just pulled into Harbor East. Enjoy it now - that bus will be a lot sadder when it leaves Sunday!
welcome to the club!
Philly answers back but goal is under review for crease violation.
if you haven't already, follow our instagram: jamheybastard
How to explain to a 19YO w/ #aspergers that saying "that's what she said" to a girl is offensive....
2 down 9 more to go then another three day weekend :) hurry up next Thursday!!! Sitting here bored text me 304-612-2469
Thanks to and restaurant week, I now have to run 10 miles tomorrow. But it was oh so worth it.
Watch us tonight at 6 pm on Channel 3!!!!!
But it's in NJ
Thank you to every person who has ever told me I can't. You are just another reason I will.
nyet, I just watch in russian)))
No. It's spelled artisanal. But I keep spelling it wrong and Word keeps yelling at me. So now I will never spell it wrong again.
YES!!! U do realize that was like 5 years ago homie!!! Now get at it and lets party!!
Fill in the blank: "My gym is awesome because ___________."
You be careful out there.
^Then the angel of God, who had been traveling in front of Israel’s army, withdrew and went behind them. The pillar of cloud also moved...
Why does twitter follow random people. I'm always seeing these random people on my timeline.
Korean inside. Yes. Please tell Mrs. Shelton I'm coming through. When are you off to #Brasil?
Brian made it sound like it is only me and him. We're discussing committee membership Sat, should I pass on a mssge from you?
Google Trip Planner now includes new route info. To plan your trip using the new & changed routes just enter a travel date AFTER 1/29/2012
#mothersday right around the corner! Get her what she really Kraves a piece of #MIKELPATRIK, origs & reproductions for any budget!
gah, so close to fly away laches! I will see you next week my friend after this rip heals.
That's where I'm at wit this bitch tho... All the dumb shut she been puttin me thru... Sometimes I b like fuck it
Nothing like trying to guess 's drawing of a river on Draw Something and having no clue what it is. :P
We're working hard on a record at the moment. We'll let you know when we emerge! Thanks for asking :)
RIP ESPN Regional tv“: When did replace Bill Hosket as the official Ohio State color analyst?”
#UnChained "Disappearin' Love"
Yup kendall!! That's my bitch!! I can get that here tho bruh
Models showed two complete sets levels conical choral posts from the model showed two complete sets levels conical chor :-)
SMFH!! RT : The average woman spends between 5 and 8 hours a day gossiping.
And I guess that's my cue to unfollow and not visit again...
depends on who you ask
I just wrote my first comic book script. It was like a different world. bit.ly/xtVHuk
I'm for personal freedom and making your own choices and all, but that Time magazine cover is weird.
Thank you, ugly, loud, ticking Staples clock for audibly reminding me every second that I am still at work
McGehee should get the JJ Hardy treatment and be sent down to A.
The monthly LOVIEE will be posted no later than Sunday night. Still recovering from a wild night...
Don't forget
Parents offered to buy me a new phone. The question is, do I really want one? Hm
you are a shooting star - thats why you are my favorite
thanks you too
Staying up 13 hours strait is a fucking horrible idea. -____-
Rest in peace, Etta James.. Thanks for the many great jazz, blues, and soul classics. Man, I hate leukemia.
was off the hook last night, 2nite will be even better, doors open 9pm till 3am, ALL NEW TOP SHELF #BottomlessCup, New Format
: YOLO - You. Obviously. Lack. Originality.
coming tomorrow BNI? Hope you're feeling better. :)
Got some skulls in the mind and gotta place them on them pad...
Please tell me the whip will be at
"Artists are brands as well... with huge followings & marketers behind them." of Live Nation. would agree
aw thanks ... Nice seein u
Damn John Cena files for divorce smh must suck after being with this girl since high school
i was jw but thats pretty cool u kno who this is right
If talk is silver worth, then silence is gold worth if you are not knowledgeable about the issue.
Always remember you have within you the strength, the patience, and the passion to reach for the stars to change the world. ~Harriet Tubman
FCCB holders in Zenith allowed access to E&Y valuation report
#mw2012 #musesocial I don't know, I have a long history with museums and cats. it may not be a joke!
before the other people came . . . Ways of framing pre-settler contact.
same :P its been a long but good day
wait wait wait , who are you ? lol / i dont think i sent money to you so please STFU // dont start with me !
thanks for having me on the show
Ted Glasser: Unintended consequence of living tethered to mobile devices: no opportunity for isolation. Autonomy is diminished.
THE AMERICAN IDOL FINALE IS NEXT WEEK. GSKDOBFKXIWGRBFKSI GO PHILLIP<33333
“: LUNCH WITH !! MISS THAT GIRL.” -- I'm so glad I didn't have to eat by myself today!
Good but mainly songs off new album. Saw blitzen trapper too. Now pumpkin time.
thanks, maybe i'll spend it with my daughter, happy vday back to u
Facebook is the adult way of having imaginary friends.
so what should I be using now instead?
Um, so our Radiothon starts tomorrow at 5:00am CDT...and the 800 line is non-existent...Can you PLEASE help??!!! Quickly!
Just ran into bay bay kids from hell
#fridayreads reading 's "Hillbilly Nationalists, Urban Race Rebels, and Black Power: Community Organizing in Radical Times."
RT if it makes you sad that after tomorrow Austin won't have braces :(((
What's the best thing that happened to you this week? Share your happy story with us!
Next few years are about good times good friends and good fortune. It's all good babybabayy
where the hell have you been?
hello Valentina thanks for the follow too I watched you're video and I like it..let me know how can I get the tooth jewelry.
thanks for the follow and support Travis congrats on a beautiful baby checkout
From the bottle? Or will you bother with a cup? :p
#BoyzAreBack!!!! A little late but you kno IDGOF! I love them Boyz
you shook of new sohh, u fucking clown.
Just listened to BT's "This Binary Universe" and moved on to "Chris Madsen Trio plays Bix Beiderbecke"
Disabled is 7 and nomdisabled is 5. And non disabled is seven
"It's when you stand out that you become outstanding." -
RT Look for the music on all things, and life will be a symphony of joy.
RT : Louisville-Jeffersonville: Thunder over Louisville gets down w craft beer. will be there! Details:...
who's having trouble? We want to help!
I just realized every tattoo I want is type based.
I don't usually care too much about the Emmys, but wow, Treme gets zero nominations??? LAME!
my uncle always messin w/ my shid , damn stay tf out my room!
Development Operations. I just roll with the titles :-)
tonight! with iProv at 9:30PM. The show is FREE FREE FREE!!!
Just blocked all my spam followers
OR CRACKER BARREL !!!
What's going on? Anything we can help with?
bad asa lol im at work listen to my cali music waitin to get off hows dancing going when u go shout me out in yo videos
Blue October is the most emotional band I've ever heard.
Haha! Well, you're also in NYC, so it's not all bad. Look forward to seeing you when you get back!
#IfIWasGhetto oh wait.. Already am!!
haha I aint tryin to take no ones bike... Im not that good on them! Haha
#YOLO... >>RT : Yo, this might be the Heat's year if you got refs playing for you. Gotta get it how you live huh? Lol.
He's probably right. Unless he guaranteed it for a specific team.
Watch "Alien Invaders" Lionfish doc. Tonight at 7:30 on
Don't cheat yourself. Do your best.
Good morning :)
Why are the Warranties and Disclaimers clauses in SHOUTING ALL CAPS when the rest of the #googledegook is in folksy non-legalese?
You should be nice; Ann Arbor is actually a very nice lady if you take the time to get to know her.
thank you for leading the senate charge to
RT : your a may baby too??? Awesome! Mines the 19th! How old u be
A beautiful evening to be outside, a glass of wine makes it even better.
How was everyone's weekend!? We've been writing like crazy! We can't wait for you all to get to hear these new songs :) -Chris
I caught ONE fish while we were fishing and my little brother caught FIVE!!!! Wow I suck
Signed, sealed, delivered. 2014 Final Four at Cowboys Stadium. Too early?
Automatic built-in rematch the following Wednesday at So many chances to suffer.
Cesar Izturis can't even lay down a suicide squeeze?! He's no Lucroy, that's for sure
Grate so im gona be terrified all day today
Boom One Records newest release by Hope Massive, "Itani" is now available on all online stores. Thank you!
you should also invest in a cruella de ville style cigarette holder then
I thought that too, but I'm pretty sure the warehouse is somewhere else.
Hey, excellent news--congratulations, Jeff! Completely well-deserved.
Thanks bud! I appreciate it.
Some parents just need to spank thier child.
#WeLoveMadison forever and ever and ever and ever <3
#SomeoneIWantToMeet All the Mahomies! <3 That would take FOREVER, literally!
aw ok
i just beat go green get lucky with 3 stars on all levels im so excited! Ps could u follow me? Plz and thanks :D
Something about Lucroy and Wolf just don't mix, and most of the time giving him the day when Wolf starts isn't an issue.
. You do realize had his fingers crossed when he tweeted that.
dumb and dumber is a classic. Great choice
RT : MKG, on what he'll do w/ 1st paycheck: “I want to spoil my mom. I think I’m going to spoil my mom to death
Not at all. ;) NOLA is just where I belong.
Out to dinner with the #bestfriend :)
2 Chains has some fighting songs
Thoughts on Jarrod Parker's first start in Oakland today?
Add upstate NY to that list, I felt it too--very subtle shaking (I thought it was me!) Then told me otherwise
so good luck finding this one boy. you will :)
RT Back on the jet to be with my family. See you in the sky! SOUNDS NICE!! SCOOP ME UP ON THE WAY!!
About to take a nap.
if I boo (haven't decided) it won't be bc he left-it will be for words said and things done since his departure.
Always do sober what you said you'd do drunk. That will teach you to keep your mouth shut. - Hemingway
Wed Oct 26 7PM: 'Even in a Cold Winter Zone' w/ Margaret Roach. Learn Tactics & plants of a year-round garden in photos and word!
Happy Birthday, sir!
Let my heart be wise. It is the god’s best gift.Medea
Have you been watching the show all along? I watched the pilot and am trying to decide if it is worth catching up on.
#GaleHarold my friend loves u so fucking much AND it's her Birthday today. :-)
We are finishing writing our essays and I turned mine in Friday. So i got to sit and stare at the wall all period.
good I made cupcakes
What a day! The birth of photographer Eadweard Muybridge, the end of the American Civil War, and the end of The Beatles...
hi can you please follow we are a part of Maxim
Last night....
Agree! Done.
Women Want It All And More – Why Aren 't We Getting It? [EXPERT]
Is there something we can help you with?
Oh hell no. The teacher is a joke & this class is a trip.
busy, busy, busy.... too much work... not enough time...
thats vicious... "nothing is more dangerous than a mother"...
": I love her the best ever!!"shes a great writer too and weekend update will never be the same without her
...Sticks & Stones may break my bones... whips and chains excite me... so throw me down, pull my hair, and please freaking bite me!!!
My dad always has excuses for everything.
Hey girl, I don't appreciate you gettin' at me hella filthy. watch your tone, mister!
fwiw our Cassandra FS is an in-house solution designed specifically for Drupal, not for general NFS.
I hear ya on that one! I can walk out the door and one is next to my place! I always say you only live once!
The Roots performing Sure Shot in tribute to MCA
perhaps u could wish me a happy birthday !!! #please !!
I'd totally watch that one!
Straits be pumpn this weekend brah. Swap out your euro speedo for 5mm neoprene and let's roll
The most incomprehensible thing about the world is that it is comprehensible.
Who would you like to see us go on tour with?!
excited to teach spin 2night at 8! are coming to class! now, what about or ?
You bet!
shout-out to Kentucky #USGenWeb from Tim Pinnick /via
Hey! How have you been?
no.. but, I'm frightened for you.
that's so sad for her to use the baby like that. People need to step back & think about what's good for a kid.
RT : History is the key to everything: politics, religion, even fashion. Eva Herzigova
Watch out for them #Bears, we got a 6'10 tightend
If my teammate had 3 points all game i wouldn't pass either
yes it is!
Hey thanks, Scott — for reading and sharing.
You know it's a special day when you say "quit eating dog food"... and it isn't to your dog.
thank da lawd its a half day.
Tell the dentist to change the station! But be nice. Remember HE has the drill!
Dear Universe, Can you send over for a visit?
Two clicks: Apple Store (bottom), then Apple icon (top).
she MIGHT have gotten away with it if she hadn't stopped completely for what felt like 10 minutes.
You know who has a super cute baby? . I want to babysit her! I promise I'll give her back. Such a cutie pie!
If you are at the end of your rope, tie a knot and hang on
"The function of the artist is to express reality as felt" Happy Birthday, Robert #Motherwell, b.1915
Just Followed Have Them
Sudden surprise - I just received a DM from Gwen Check out this female fronted, hard hitting, #Metal band & follow !!!
Got sucked into watch A-list for 3 hours...woops! Gotta get back to life now
Pretty cool concept there.
poor Manny Pacquaio's alleged quote never happened, the original article and publication "National Conservative Examiner" does not exist.
ReTweet us if you want to be added to our #OTPCrew List on Twitter!
Behind your back, we talk about you all the time. Behind your back, we spread some shit spread some lies.
operation find salina a place to live...and GO!
BLUE IVY IS BORN
Smoking a cigar with my dad
Running over a dead bird with the lawn mower, always fun!
Of course I'll be watching the big hockey game tonight. I'm from Minnesota. Pass the lefse and jello salad.
Will you be at your #Dodgers game tomorrow? I know I will be there.
Favorite Mark Twain quote #1: If you tell the truth, you don’t have to remember anything.
Trying to brainstorm studio apartments in film and TV shows. Harder than I thought it would be. Too many "homes" are huge/aspirational.
Have you reported yet on the beating of the Atlanta teens it's all over the news and my brother is the lawyer for one of them
Right on. This my first time doing this. Asked her for information and she was less than useless. Ordered enough for the month.
jeremy evans
We're out of pudding but we do have a very nice and light roll cake from the Asian bakery.
My favorite messy recipe is my homemade marinara. It has to simmer for 5 hrs and it always bubbles all over the stove!
I can't wait for this race to be over. 5ks is all im thinking about until October
Hahaha. Hey, did you see Lady Gaga Thanksgiving?
think of weed, then smoke some if you got it, then go to sleep
glad to hear it. Enjoy, it's awesome.
Second Round is complete with Mika Miyazato (-5) leading. Third round tee times to begin at 3:15PM off holes #1 and
Nice! What bar? : At a bar in Seattle dropping Limbeck, Casket Lottery, and Ultimate Fakebook on the jukebox. Amazing.
Did anyone else realize today how little they care about Obama's stance on gay marriage?
Potentially! Haha. I'll let you know
I am on a plane home from Iowa right now... Where were you?!
#HonestyNight i`m really not a freak but i love to please my lover
RT If You KNOW Ur Gettin Justin Bieber's Someday Perfume Tmr!!! I AM!!!! (;
Rihana looks great
that's what I keep telling myself! :)
Happy Friday!
via Newjerz Prince Life is like being on stage! So everyday you should try and look your best!
#TRILLMATIC In A Few Minutes..rt
We only get reimbursed if we are presenting at the conference.
RT no problem you've got a nice collection
everyone knows you go to the "hardware" store to get hammered...
aww I loved the rain when it was here! My garden looks more than alive!
we made the mistake of going to the theater way to late yesterday
I'm already spread wide open, just have your way with me already.
RT “: Voting to unite sag n aftra finally. Vote yes actors” YES!! You ROCK!
I am at my place in Bucktown, no concert
The moment our eyes met<3
on the side with some southern comfort.lol happy turkey day Blake.
RT if YOU would like ME to FOLLOW YOU on a different account of MINE!? <3
thank you! Glad you enjoyed the pic
my name is micael and i m a doer! :D
The biggest bid'ah of our times is that huquq al-'ibad are not considered to play any role in spirituality & piety. -Ml. Shah Wasiullah (R)
Back in ocraM's dungeon.... Don't mind the screams.
they're not
#3WordsForYou Leave me alone
How's Everyone
what are you doing tonight
You have to give a ton of credit for staying loyal to Gary Henderson, UK takes series from LSU.
Thanks, Have fun today. , all is forgiven. for now ;-)
Should be sleeping. But now I'm hungry. And my confidence is as low as my blood pressure. Oops.
That was random and I don't care.
Thanks for making my computer useful again.
Los Angeles, CA -Need females for photoshoot. No nudity. Pay is 600 dollars. (Casting Code A1)
I HATE Twitter spam.
Awesome. Kudos on your win and for being a good dad, too. Thanks for the response.
Where in heck is Obama's plan? This guy is a great speaker, but a lousy leader.
A giraffe can clean its ears with its 21-inch tongue.
thanks for having me - it was a lot of fun!
Patty Mills has made four 3-pointers. He has 30 points and the Spurs lead the Warriors 101-95 with 5:05 left.
I am my own person don't care to think nor be like the rest follow me y'all
u don't like girls Clive-
About n hour ago here on the east coast, which is incidentally the only time zone that matters.
Today was the most interesting day I've had in a while lol
We are at the Conference NYC follow our updates with
The only thing has to do is rt tweet and my life would be set! (: #guymahomie! (: and btw I'm goin to your online concert!:D
Needs to go "cold weather" shopping! :-)
any reason you aren't making the newsletter a blog? Easier to share, you can still email it, search it etc...
Where yall hookers @!!!
You said you were leaving over 20 minutes ago, just fucking leave
not here..it doesnt show
Witching hour in the east. Goodnight tweeps.
oh..... “: You're more likely to die from a vending machine than win the $640 million Mega Millions jackpot tonight”
It's 2012. I carry the future on my belt. Why can't we make a fruit cup that doesn't spit pineapple juice when I open it?
I've even had to replace my entire wardrobe once and am working on a second time now
thanks for sharing good stuff!
Games still going on despite the power outage. Thanks to the natural light!
I'm cracking that smile i just can't seem to loose.<3
I love my dogs(:
"The posthumous is the category in which the unthinkable must be thought." (Sandar Goodhart)
I would very much like to read a book tonight... but which one?
I got my tickets for the Seattle show :) Section 115, row 3, seats 1 & 2! What did you guys get? :)
I love the #pens!! I love pens fans!! I love everything about them!!
it's ok. When I make it. I will just blast them lol
it's never too early. I have *secrets*. When we do the tea-bag drop I'll share.
Ima Write a book "think like a woman"
I guess you're not retiring
Remember, our reaction to life can turn a gift into resentment or transform an ugly caterpillar into a beautiful butterfly
Them hoes dont owe me NOTHING
never to late to try and fix things with your friend
*When my parents are asleep* Me- "Shh! they're sleeping" .... *When I'm asleep* Parents- "Let's vacuum the house for 3 hours"
Holy shit every guy sucks
That DJ is the best thing to happen to Phoenix all summer.
I find it interesting that Pinterest users won't title their pins. They prefer visual browse to keyword search.
Do unto to others as you would have them do to you.
Drusen are small, yellow deposits that form within the retina. They are sometimes associated with macular degeneration.
Thank you for translating and sharing!
Fuck the shit im done nobody will ever see me again im leaving my phone on the side of the road love you bye
the only thing making me nervous about the as-of-yet unscheduled move is the vinyl that should be making its way to me 'round then.
"utterly predictable" as many see true for climate change. And there are deficit deniers and those who think we can wait to act
I love those pair girls. They are to great and to much fun!!! #friendshipbraceletes twitter less "Chis" :)
RT <== haven't been there in awhile (well come on over and #getUGLY )
Rick Santorum wrote an autobiography that later became famous entitle West Side Story
; i'm not known to be a bubble buster.. but those aren't ducks. those are commonly called geese. #lmfao :o
Tired of lines yet? Performances of DR HORRIBLE-LIVE @ 6pm and 10pm Tonight! Sign up for $20 Standby tickets!
No, Google maps for Blackberry, when I search for "park" I don't mean "parking."
when i need you the most.. where are you?
They just silenced the word "Mexican" in American Werewolf in London when the Brit is telling the dumb airplane joke. Fuck liberals and Syfy
I'm officially checked out, no more work today. Ready to devote some quality time to my family. Happy holidays everyone!!
doesn't pronounce the "t" in "often" I'm so proud!! 😂
why no DB in the draft? Oh well. C grade draft. Better than the last couple years.
Onion and thyme.... I would be angry. Really?!
Fucking boredom. Someone save me.
LIKE! I cant tell you how much I wanna be there.
I'm thinkin' Valencia in 2014!
Did you send or receive any awesome mail recently? Share a pic with #ShowAndMail!
Home builders gearing up lately for a robust recovery!
ha, right on.
I hope you get out safely.
For my mistakes that i kno I can an will get better on
I wudnt be aable to fall aasleep if I knew I had some money in there hahaahahha
I swear to lord I've been down to earth but more times then not I've been lifted
Well played. RT : Now that the humidity is going down here in Indy- Sign up for and save $$ on golf
your the worst
try being 6'4 in coach. Love midwest airlines 4 that reason.
Agreed. RT : This city should be embarrassed to have voted Potbelly 2nd best sandwich shop in Best Of.
Does anyone have an excuse about why Kobe didn't do enough when the got that ass whooped
point in a direction and I'll do wat needs to be done.
“Social marketing eliminates the middlemen, providing brands the unique opportunity to have a direct relationship with their customers.” ...
great thanks. I will check this out!
OMG I know! I was so ticked off when I heard what Geraldo said!
OH AWESOME! IT'S Tuesday! Two piercings for the price of one!! YES!! All damn day long!! Because we love you!
Great having you back at CG. Welcome home!
Yeah hopefully! Can we go back to sulphur soon?!
book signing at B&N in Savannah GA was terrific!
what a tune!
Older adults (age 60-84) exhibit more negative age-bias than younger adults (age 17-26) Source: Georgia Institute of Technology, March 2011
Eat get fat
I take it back after you said that.
#findUW we have our first hunter at clue 3.
So I'm not alone, I just hope is not a killer or something lol jk (x
Happy Birthday Darrell. Have a great day!!
i can't even say happy mother's day to my mom cos she's not here.....
#TrackTryouts are tomorrow i hope i make the team.
I was the best out of all if you guys!
Thought the same thing and I watched him at Temple.
Do you think there are clear leaders in the debate, personal preferences aside.
aww, you missed me? i missed you too x finally i'm worth someones time. :)
must be why u failing
The Kings are the only LA team with a chance to win it all. The Staples Center workers wont be that busy after this NBA round
You say one thing, yet you do another.
you know desire gonna be working when you gey there
hey bobby will you be doing any in-stores signing copies of your album?
Last chapter of the semester tonight! Come and give a shout out to A. Esquivel. See you all at 7PM!
back to bed again.
“Success is that old ABC - ability, breaks, and courage.”~Charles Luckman
Off to Dubai.
Me RT : Who's in Detroit & coming back to EL today?
Out in 6th for 0. Ak < kk for my 14 bigs. Possibly could've found a fold as absurd as that is
It's my birthday, can I get a follow? Please :)
Wake forest is doing work.
ur mi beautiful queen ^__^ i love u
so prom is looking pretty lame for me.
“That idea [of generating new content] wasn’t something that made sense before HubSpot taught me why that would be a good idea
When I miss the bus & have to walk, I keep my mum on the phone & talk shit about the creeps. Getting quite good at shit talking in bangla.
anything I can do? Lol.
If my family and my hood loves me That's all I need real talk
No comment should be necessary
Ah I get what you're saying. Don't know how I feel about editions either, but with my fine art background I can't part from it.
I wanna play with a monkey 🐒
Hope mama sanders has a great birthday!!!
I'm flying from Boston to Baltimore today and I am not nervous in the least. We've come a long way in 10 years.
"Power comes from love."
that's a good reason to turn down an app. next in line among bad fonts is papyrus and tempus sans. all hard to take srsly.
Good night for Tony, great night for Ducan, & goodnight to the Phx Suns!
....oh RT : Baby....let me....show you how yo pussy works, since you didn't bring it to me first....
Money make up a wig n jewelry can make a bitch cute buh wats underneath all that shit doe is wat I'm wondering
Talent is universal, but opportunity is not.
I'm single and yea that my daughter
For all this politicking shit, there has to be something in the middle
If God favors you to send u an amazing spouse....everyday make sure you love and appreciate them!!
my neighbor is outside screaming jump...to a tree :/ I won't ever understand his ways
With our books out!
wow. That's just great.
everyone should watch kailey's new cover. My boo did an amazing job and loved the song choice, obviously <3
Lol everyone is freaking out how one of the crews took the boyz move
hey man love your stuff. I work with 9-18 yr. old hockey athletes. Would love to talk sometime. I interned -Adam
Camos Brothers in Chapel Hill is Closed for the summer, we will re-open in August! See you then!
luck in AC this week you are gonna compete against my best friend from Dancin Queens :)have fun...love you Nick! <3
DBU Music Alumni--Come tonight at 7PM to Pilgrim Chapel to hear the Chorale lead us in worship at their Spring Concert!
Alexi rally killer
Pleased a proposal I authored with to use self-employment assistance in our efforts to create jobs was inc. in payroll tax deal.
Oh awesome! Both the NBA and the NFL are officially locked out!
Moyer came to a cancer treatment school when I was living in Seattle & hung out all day, a super awesome guy!
Happy Thanksgiving!
Can you do me a favor ; take a Look at this& give Me feedback? it Would be helpful, thankyou. # www.prepaidlegal.com/hub/bonds95
There should be temperature limit on UGGS.. It was 75 today in NY.. Why do you have on them feet Warmers?
MKELive All Stars Thanks for the RT's this week!
Everytime you analyze how you live you get mad
The perfect temperature for tea is two degrees hotter than just right. ~Terri Guillemets
3 more days ;)
ADD kicking in right...about...now.
i'm not sure how well it'll go over on all time slash though
Now this is the way to wake up!! YOU TOO! 💗💚“: #SKEEWEE! Have a WONDERFUL day. ": Hey SKEE WEE!!!"”
Thank you! I will be sure to post pics when we are there next Saturday!
Guess I'll go see what's on tv.
you guys look amazing!
Oh good. It's raining. I am a nervous wreck. No pun intended.
I do have a life. Its called my twitter life. And it sure as hell is better than my real one. So suck it up.
yolo ;) good timing
you dropped a half rack on the floor?!? You have to cradle it like a baby! C'mon
Hollidays are right around the corner think about a scooter guy membership, arrive safe and keep your great rate
Good morning from LiLLiES of #WoodleyPark #DC ! Head in for our $7 sandwich/salad lunch special! #dcfoodies Just a block from the zoo!
#GameofThrones is on...don't eff with me..
what's up homie?
small business loans
please follow me <3 #loverng Itd make my week
Still taking your questions for tonight's sports sunday. Tweet us your best and we'll answer on the air with Canzano.
me neither ! LOL
Queens people always trying to act hard with their middleclass @$$
are u lesbians ???
My parents didn't even notice I was gone the whole time...lol
#gametime Lets bring it to trinity
it usually involves my boyfriend and I, or family and friends. Someone always ends up passing away.
Shout out to my boy he is going off this morning follow him and laugh with me
Where do you go for good ideas?
I am keeping busy and steady. It will get busy later when it rains. I talk with u when I am waiting to see new patients.
I agree!
well he said he goes with the easiest girl he can get so your right i guess your just the #1 choice
Presents Shopping :)
nice win for the Aggs
every day. Just especially so today :)
this culdesac has changed my life don't talk bad about it
I love you picture!!
I wish I was strong enough to lift, not one, but both of us . ❤
“: Is there such a thing as unintentional grounding?". Yes, a Matt Ryan pass.
It was now or never, so I picked never.
Newest spot for a paper cut... My top lip, ugh 😒
Eating trail mix this morning. Feel like I need to do a hike. Maybe I should switch to potato ships and I won't get those feelings.
Heat is ridiculous. I should move to a place with more buildings, trees, and hills for shade. #kansas? Oh #wait they don't have any of those
Just claimed my first #Facebook offer to 3 of my favorite S's: social, shopping, savings.
sounds good to me...Bryan what do you think?
Good morning beautiful people!
My biggest wish is to find a sketchbook along similar lines of Smash. One that has different colors and types of papers.
Feeling like Something is missing..
BTW...thought you were following me. I was going to shoot a DM to thank you for the live updates. Looks like a cool event.
I wanna bitch from everywherw
Match.com here I come! Pathetic I kno but gotta get out there sometime, why sit around n wait?
Pranks, Gags, Jokes, Novelties, It's all here in our Amazon Store ---> www.amazon.com/shops/Fun_Squared
UMBC is buzzing w/ #URCAD12 activity today. Heard great poster presentations on Chinese investment in Sub-Saharan Africa, Arab Spring & more
When y'all gon #WakeUp and recognize real talent? I swear I'm on my swagg. #Woke!!
Alright! I'll talk it out with some people, see what works. It was great talking to you again, and meeting you last night! :)
Going to 's tonight :D
Apollyon's theme by >>>
RT : So far we have & Pattie Curry attending #SHRMAtlanta from ILSHRM - doing survey of board now.
In other news, my cat just went ape sh*t, jumped to TOP of my bedroom blinds and split them in half! :/
49. Ugh! :( one day I'll what I want to do when I grow up!
Goodnight twitter, <3 & goodnight . I know you'll notice me one day.. Anyways, GOODNIGHT!
- they're rebranding the Spicy Chicken Sandwich as "Wendy's Fire Crotch".
Thanks for the mentions/RTs -
good luck. You'll kill that exam. Love you 💘
Hooves & Beak has been on my "must see" list since 2010. Shameful that I haven't made it happen yet. Plus I'm loving The Thoughts these days
Wahoo! Can't wait to see you there you gorgeous geek you! xoxox!
Genius is eternal patience. -Michelangelo
It is me. Eddie of Eddie's Attic got the boot. I wonder how JM is feeling about the guy that put him on the map getting canned!
I hate existential crises that pop up in the middle of the work day.
my dude you already know!!!
In order: nope, nope, nope. But correct city. Just wring addresses / brands.
‎#MarryTheGaga is trending! I would Marry all of you in a heartbeat. Sometimes I wear a monster paw ring on my wedding finger. Yours 4 life!
We will be at the Pittsburg mills strongland EXPO this weekend
Love is an irresistible desire to be irresistibly desired. ~ Robert Frost
I bet you are. Golfer. :)
Where the Wild Things Are. I was so sad! Especially because it's leaving theaters today. :(
Coming home for lunch is a tease. I don't wanna go back😥
YES! but u r buying the drinks :) lol RT : I'll come to the tweetup if u still let me after missing so many
Thanks for joining us on the Radio Show tonight!! :)
I Hate You.
Do what you think is best to understand everything better.
Is this just a game? I don't know. <3
Canada has glow-in-the-dark dinosaurs on coins, and America can't even get "In God We Trust" off our money. Getcha head in the game, U.S..
I feel bad for all those people who lost their homes in the tornado its so sad
Karma at work, clearly.
those babies are huge!
Love the idea of "Godet" writing a #Kinkade obit. Send me a link when you do!
me too. I was pumped!:/
Braun just got enough of that one to put it over the wall in left.
I wanna go to six flags let's get a group and go
Day 15 on the platform, ready to go home. Day is going good so far, have seen 3 whales today, 1 as close as about 50 yards.
your not ;)
When will #badgers get a real football coach? Can't wait to hear this year's excuses.
I had a beautiful Marroccan sandwich at Casablanca on 1st avenue between 61st & 62nd street in Manhattan. Great service, fresh and gorgeous!
It's a lifestyle – train like there's no finish line.
Ready to book your load! RT : #EYEOFTHETIGER over here in #Truckload Sales ! Can you dig it?
yea but i gota set it all up 2nite but ima hyu once i got it done
that seems weird. a bug perhaps? I can't see any reason for them to do that.
i second that! Kindle Fire would be sweet!
We are going strong for #SXSWInteractive. Looking to keep my team active during
Ann Romney believes we must respect the choices women make...so is Mitt pro-choice again?
WOW I'm glad I ain't bet any money wit any of my #Philly followers, I call it how it is , Good comeback.
Welcome back Intern Shalynn Vaughn! We hope we provide you with rewarading and exciting projects this season!
Happy birthday ... Have some bourbon. Like I have to tell you.
First day of last week down! :)
“: #Gemini hates dull lovers.”
Can't wait to hang out in Austin again. Your travel photography is amazing!
Happy Valentine's Day 9Round Nation! How are you showing that special someone you care?
at least you did somehing
Breakfast time.
Thank you for following!
#veryimportantpeople CEO of Apple Inc. RIP #SteveJobs I'll always remember you.
Way to go Wings. Keep that forecheck.
Don't hold on so tightly tour path that u miss the magic.. opportunites present ursef at inopportune times # wov12 jennife chayes inspires
#oomf is so intelligent
If all food tasted like the uni/garlic/chili/clam linguine at Son of a Gun in Los angeles, there would be no more war in the world.
The bright side: when teams get new stadiums, they get Super Bowls. The Packers play in Super Bowls. I could celebrate a Pack title in MN...
RT : Why do we park on driveways and drive on parkways? Just to be silly? ~George Carlin
It's almost #draft time! Best of luck to all the former #bsubroncos over the next few days. Can't wait to see where you all land!
Happy birthday !! You guys gotta stop growing up! Makes me feel old! 🎉🎈🎉
The Link Magazine is currently undergoing Web design changes. We hope to have an interactive, user-friendly site. So stay tuned!
Cant decide if I want to get my membership for the month of May at the AC or at the Y
hi remy i knw u dont knw me but i understand how it is to have friends den they betray u im going through the same thing now
Come on 11 o'clock.... Waffle House is callin my name!
I think might have run her out of town. Or he secretly seeing her. We can't decide which.
i guess she like is ruff
Sleepover almost got awkward as I very nearly blasted my snoring recording.
hope everything is great on your side. So, as we talked before, which app are you interested in? Mac app or iPhone app? Let me know.
Did you know Henry Blair, the 2nd African-American to receive a patent, invented a corn seed planter in 1834 and a cotton planter in 1836?
The snow is falling in Downtown Seattle! Don't feel like driving home? DM for reservations
Daay of silence..
awesome game. i love the fluid game play for sure. Plans for any new ones in the future? Thanks.
yeah bitch you boo boo! you turned down,you thirsty!
Haha...jelly beans will do that! Enjoy your walk and have a blessed day! :-)
Yeah, you should stick with marine biology....
There are so many paths to Super Pac success for President Obama probably just can't choose one.
I think there is sign on 27 as you enter Montauk: "Anne Weiskopf, please go home"
Hey baby. Wish I was relaxing too! See you in a bit. Da Dockta!
“: Oxford! I'm playing this Friday night at 10:30pm! Come one, come all!” I'll be there selling hot dogs outside.
love you too, Mama :)
Welcome to twitterland where you'll spend way too much time :-)
stupid tweet limit
Better than a thousand useless words is one single word that gives peace. ~ Buddha
I ask that same question every time they post something about one another….
G1 test post. Also testing protected updates
Read in
I feel like every road in avon is shut down.
Oh that is very pretty. Like the one-shoulder and color.
#10ThingsThatAnnoyMe Guys telling me we can be the next Jay-Z and Beyonce but they are unemployed!
that's who i am right now!
hey brother!!!
here all about C.L.A.P. on newest podcast out today!!!!! PLUS a GIVEAWAY!!!!!
yea, easy to write a check your ass cant cash too....ego got the best of him....even coaches said he did it...own it
That super cool moment when uses "you're" instead of "your".
will there going crazy killing everyone
C'mon #Brewers!! Too many meat balls served up this season so far!
Fracking porn! RT : Latest oil and gas engineering term to make me blush: "open hole swell packer"
well, i wanted go hang out around MSG to see if i could get a glimpse of bieber, but my dad won't let me out of the house these days.. :|
The deadline may have passed, but you can STILL submit your application for the 2012-13 Corps!!!!
M, I had a couple of those!
Enjoy your labor day everyone! We are open all day..Come beat the rain & pick up our beautiful flowers to ease your pain. -_-
herbs in a bottle are perfect for cooking when you've got no time! Love them.
Now watching Serra vs Pasadena
has received a Rosetta Lenoire Award Nomination for Diversity from Actors' Equity Association!
"I'm tired of reading films. Less text, stats and more stories with pictures" said Fri by Loira Limbal but credited to Mable Haddock....
What Would Bear Do?
Not really, that's not his game. Forcing him into that role if someone else has a better shot is a mistake
Packers Mike. By the way, your the greatest of all time
I'm covered. thanks so much, though:)
headed to Key West this weekend. Anything doing there we should know about?
Happy Easter
Asus is usually very fast so I'm sure it'll work just fine
i mean have some respect for your team. Lots of great players never won a title and still out on for they team
My partner is interviewing for his sub license today. I know my boy will do well.
I HATE homework...
Thanks for saving me during the awkward car ride! :)
why r the #Colts n #Redskins taking all the time to make their picks tho?? # NFLDraft
Sorry, I can't hangout. My uncle's cousin's sister in law's best friend's insurance agent's roommate's pet goldfish died. It was tragic.
At a CATO green energy policy lecture... No words to express how this makes me feel.
My name is Diamond Shore and I love Teresa because she is beautiful, a great singer and dancer, and so inspirational <3
i wish for a time when equality is such a given that we only talk about it in history class
Up making that good musik
musicians have very little leverage due to the perception that they are easily replaceable. and hell, DJs are cheaper!
prob after I get back to the crib
Looking forward to seeing James Galea on the KTLA Morning News on Mon, April 25th!
Jerry's 8pm tonight in Wicker Park to support some good music making! come join.
Let us not be too particular; it is better to have old secondhand diamonds than none at all.
Editiing the pilot episode. Stay tuned for airtime & web addy. Follow the Freaks on Twitter & on www.yournewsdetroit.com!
It's a rare occasion that I have to get up early on a Sunday for work. Of course today is the day Cookie decides to be cuddly.
So jealous you're there. I love the ugly win...Lakers baby!
Check out our new and spooky cookies for HALLOWEEN!! Stop by the store, mentions twitter and receive a FREE treat!
When my hands go cold, my nails turn purple.
not every single one of my pictures are of me.But some people post pictures of them selves like in every picture they have .
Probably a good idea
you bet and thanx for the compliment
boo! You just missed me!
Our Friends at Song Of The Day featured #callmemaybe by yesterday.#NowPlaying on
where are you moving?
If the #RedSox can't win against the A's and Orioles, how will they fare against the Yanks and Rays? Is this a lost year?
the VW commercial, with the little boy dressed as darth vader. love it!
At getting my eat and drink on for the first time with the wifey!
I love a good disaster training meeting, it makes me feel like shouting "Bring it on!"....hoping I didn't just tempt fate.
All the world's a stage - or so they tell me.
tweeting about yourself again?
that sucks homie
hey ya whore :)
i get this, just don't see it happening and don't think it's realistic at this time. thots?
I've decided to watch every post-Leone Eastwood film. Just finished WHERE EAGLES DARE, so it's now time for PAINT YOUR WAGON.
has tons of opportunities if you're looking to relocate to San Diego! When you do, let me help you find your new home!
How about smoothly shaded 3D objects?
Hey! Aren't you supposed to be out of town??
Getting so stressed and nervous for Thursday
Sparty is in trouble!
Delish!! Hot spots to check out: in The Cosmopolitan - BEST Bamboozled milkshakes & for BEER!
Its a wrap on A VERY STRANGE MAN! Quite possibly one of the funnest projects ive had the pleasure to work on!!
At Brocach. Live music - Irish style downstairs. Somewhat strangely, Guitar Hero upstairs (a bit loud).
Heading to Midway for the #bmorebookfest! Little nervous!
that's not true.
Thanks for noticing!
lots of yawning :)
E-reader petting zoo creates a dynamic hands-on learning experience to the e-book/e-reader session this afternoon. Bruss
Let me get off this computer.
You're welcome! I love reading other people's stories! (Guess that's why we're writers!<g>)
So, who else is up??
The Los Angeles
#WFFConf12thrilled to be having social connections with amazing Social changers/leaders
Lucy in the sky with diamods.
The Chicago Music Festival Coming Soon...
no. But they need to get back to sac state.
the basic PLOT: pickles, lettuce, onion, tomato
"I aint go to high school, i went to school high"
video photoshoot at the fire station! We just took pics with a fire truck! Hope we get in the video!
Lmao, Alesha! I noticed it was on and planned on tweeting you too lol I think of you every time... Never fails.
shut your dumbass up, nobody in there right mind will do any of that shit you speaking
. grilling Brietbart stooge re O w "radical" professor @ Harvard diversity rally but why cover nonstory?
What a beautiful day for a Brewer game! Go Crew!!!!
Big things to come
Finally boarding to key west, about time!
Oprah Winfrey~ The whole point of being alive is to evolve into the complete person you were intended to be.
my phone hasn't been ringing off the hook this morning - does that mean has finally stopped calling?
On da way to Canton Jones birthday party,lets go
i know i can smell 'em...yum...
I want a pair of Isabel Burlap Ballet Flats, and they seem to be on back order everywhere in my size (5.5). Must be comfortable.
I'm drunk
Settling down to watch The Voice. , you carry this show and steal it often. But we can always rely on your honesty!
Is it Halloween? Cause I just saw a penguin and an orange fuzzy monster walking down the street...
it would be awesome if you followed me! it would really make my day :]
Does that solidify or discount my observation? Ha! MT I think the paper boxes in the NGen Lounge are so we can write on them
I start with me eyes closed. Can we artificially open them so I don't start with close eyes? Or do someting?
come visit Missouri!!!!!
Louisville is MUCH better when you are in it !!! Please don't GO !!!!!!!!!
thanks for the compliment on the shoes! My girlfriend (CeCe) says they make me look like a 15 year old skateboarder. :(
What do you mean we run another gaming community website that has a pretty big To Do list? :-p Next for a touch-up
Back home. Good ole Pennsylvania! :)
Vick is back as a guest in his old houst
Nobody ever told me playing with data sets was this much fun.
I'll put my big Loufa wherever you need me to Michelle! Just tell me where it would feel the best for you! Xoxo
Ah I love the sound of #rain while lying in bed :-)
Heading to Cincy this afternoon, haven't been in yrs. Have a casual, dining alone, dinner recommendation?
Thanks for joining! Happy to see more Emersonians added to the community.
Biden is making all these 'less experienced' people look better to me every day. LOL
so hard to find a job. huhu
I know what that means...gets the people going!
My dad was washing his car & his soap bucket got stolen dear god
yeah, I saw that. What a piece of work?!
WOULD U SELL UR SELL FOR FORTUNE & FAME
I got vcu at the 12 over wichita! Think they keep their magic from last year
: one more cup of Caffe Mocha and you're done!
Overcast, love notes from San Francisco, swoon
I want to start doing yoga again
See I can't decide whether to wear red or green for the evening. At least I know where I'm going to be.
Funkotron is next!!!
Wrestlemania comeback in the works for Lesnar.
That girl in that Honda commercial is cute!
I know because my job keeps me informed. Lol. I.e. Christmas program at church
Thanks Laura!
Thanks Everyone for follow me ... I will follow you back ;)
anytime gorgeous :)
I got a job!
send me those pics you took on your phone of us
I hate it. You wanna trade me places?
iight bet Saturday it is
Gotta go peeps. C everyone later. Thank you to my new followers, ngood to meet you.
Baffert's Liaison draws unlucky No. 20. Bodemeister still to go.
lol no :o ik u go to south rite?
I've got it - I remember bc it was Horizontal instead ... I remember I got 2 bc I thought my cousin wanted 1, I'll look 2day
I LOVE YOUU
FOLLOW IF U LIKE OR THINK U GOT SWAGG :*
Can't let highs get too high or lows too low: Isn't Empire Strikes Back that much better knowing Return of the Jedi soon follows?
Can anyone recommend a good Mexican restaurant on the west side? I'm talking a good margarita and good food...
Well here we go. is following you again ;)
Time for a
So how was insomnia last night. Did you jinx yourself?
& ill do the same thing so chill out Dawg smh . whicho gay ass lmao bitch can't get it . It like mine .n awh left me up n here
good morning
Nose looks good.
Best weekend ever thanks to my girls 💜
Um why do they think Justin is cute? He is far from it.
#ExpertVisibilityTip: Before you approach the media, are u ready? Is your msg clear? Do you have something to promote yet?
We passed through a long area of fumes that smelled like thick natural gas. it made me feel nausious and then really sleepy.
OMG it sounds like heaven right now ": A tropical vaca is needed asap<St Maarten"
RT : Cubs and Bulls game tonight.. can only hope for 2 Ws for Chicago go
What's a tree book?
Hopin' I'm not forgettin no homework.
There is already an Art & Entertainment section, but not enough content detected. May be time to curate a Friday Arts edition …
": #TooMuchDoubt Troy Davis."When is he set to be executed and is there an online petition?
Happy to help...many variables is right!!
Sippin playing dominoes
What are we doing here? Why is nothing clear?
right? Basketball awesomeness
bry if your rap game was half as good as your twitter game you might get 120 views/listens.
Breakfast on breakfast on breakfast. With bacon strips and jack daniels syrup!
Thanks for mentions and RTs!
let me know. The elvisito is a winner.
": Good morning" Well good morning wood to you too ;)
...Mike Mullady, Don Matsanoff, Greg Thomas, Tom Fischer, Jeff Lyons, Todd Greiner, Phil Pelok.
whenn are you putting it upp?
Alright time to be sick today at
Except when they have breaking news on Favre's retirement, right?
Heading to Buenos Aires--anyone have favorite translator or city apps or must do's? Thx!...Gracias!
Another meeting today - looking forward to new guests & the introduction of our photographer as a new member!
Capturing photographs of lightning must be an art form in itself.
lol u can make a lil spread sheet lol
omg, this guy on the Mules News. LOL.
workin to birth this new whipp !! Ya dig
": CAPS AT 7:30 LAKER GAME AT 10:30 LAKERS SHOULD TANK LOSE ON PURPOSE TO GET MIKE BROWN FIRED" Ha, but doubt it.
I hit over 1400!!! Good shit twitter! Hit me up tell me what's going on guys and also hmu with new song ideas!
if u follow me ;)
I hear that Chris Judd's taken to dressing like Edward Scissorhands and listening to The Cure. S'pose that'd make him a Visy-Goth.
hahaha it was so easy. Magic Eraser, drop shadow effect, and save it as a .png. Will I be able to drop .png files on most media?
lol I don't remember
What makes you think blocking me is going to solve your problems?
A9 My buddy and because just about everything they say cracks me up.
“: jus tryna find out why are people so bitter”<<<< when you find the answer let me know
"When you get to the end of your rope, tie a knot and hang on." ~ Franklin D. Roosevelt 1882-1945
Follow me. It's makes keeping up easier.
It's been over for years
I want tacos O.o
Love waking up to the sound of the birds chirping. Stays with me all day.
Enjoyed having you guys over. Good luck with the move and job search!
I am loving watching season 2 of the 1970s Hulk TV show!
I see allot of K's are you a nupe.....
Whatever you see you gotta keep a sense of humor; you gotta be able to smile through all the bullshit."
Thanks so much, Jason!! I truly appreciate it!
Today I am making my own fun by coming up with truly awful, pun-filled titles for a talk on historical beekeeping. Coworker is not amused.
Whitney Houston is dead? Fuuuk!
Vote for tonight !!
. I don't know how you missed it in Isikoff's list...."intermediate range"....it's a big deal
then what i'm saying is: yes. please. RT What I'm saying is I have food done today if anyone wants to come over and get a plate.
the law is the law, but I need to understand why a child would need 11k a month for support?
My daughter and I saw Avatar 3D last night. Amazing! The movie lived up to it"s hype. A must see in 3D... I was very impressed. Go see it...
is enjoying the very warm, sunny, tropical, and clear environment of the Hawaiian Islands. Swimming, surfing, snorkeling, and hiking!
That attitude will have to change when is your sister-in-law.
I can always make you laugh :D I'm good at that !! :)
Another new vocab word: 20K for a startup is known as "Ramen Money"
What is the deal when a human girl sneezes like a Disney princess? Is it real life?
pretty sweet!!
#Watertime is a few!
Rebound second shot 3...
This man suddenly decided to start using all caps in all of his tweets..
He hates you bitch.
Item-level describing in a finding aid and feeling a wee bit guilty about it. Still, will be huge help w/ specific q's about publications.
Yes!! I loved that and you should def propose it as a session. I will come if I can :)
AYE YOU DOWN THERE ☟ THERE'S A MONSTER UNDER YOUR BED!!
Natural Health Magazine Subscription, as low as $3.19/year: Subscribe to Natural Health Magazine for as low as $3.19 per year. To tak...
Melancholy men [possess]... a divine ravishment, which stirreth them vp to be excellent Philosophers, Poets, Prophets." - R. Burton, 1621
First Evotek SYM 026 Formula 1 Simulator Arrives in US after Receiving Rare, Real-life Endorsement by Ferrari Formula ...
#occupysd protester (who says he is vet and fed employee) broke into meeting, tells journos to spin coverage for movement.
remember us at rayovacbattery.net and usadeaf.com
thanks for the follow man!
i'ts hard to conceive that somebody like you, could be with someone like me.
I like two-a-days. Now I feel like I've had enough exercise for one day! Dinner with and Dr. Crazy-legs Wright!
When he or she comes running, tell him or her that your feet are sore and could use a little rub down.
LUKE!!! How are you, my friend?
Hello World!!!
www.thesoapguy.com Bookmark it!!!
Holy shit this rain...
#Inspiration is an energy that is always there waiting for you to connect to it. It takes #courage to notice it.
doing ok little under the weather but dogs are keeping me company :-)
just listen to say somthing! *TEARS FALLING FROM MY EYES RIGHT NOW* i just gotta say 1 thing iloveyou austin follow me plss<33
RT : KC Chiefs draft pick Devon Wylie has agreed to terms on a contract. Congrats
: Woo! That's quite the compliment! Lots of those in the derbs.
#ASimpleWhiteName O.J.
"Dominick. I dunno want me to ask them?" Yeah ( I say ) "Ok, god damnit! Lookin' for builders"
going for a run and then beginning training for my backup career as a professional sc2 player. Ben.Prime.WE
How is your day going, from a lovely Angel:)
Because only public tv/radio does actual history broadcasting, that's why. And why so important to protect.
Esp since it'll be his last in a Rangers uniform.
#ArtFact - English artist Andy Brown, created a portrait of Queen Elizabeth II of Britain by stitching together 1,000 used tea bags.
sned us over line sheet and info of your brand. to look forward to hearing from u thnkz
Lmao Touche on that... well i know of one in particular :)
can i go over to the elementary school, and take nap time all day!?!
First pool party of the year went...um....yeah. It went.
MIDSUMMER at is magical, joyful, and thrilling. One of the coolest things I've seen.
WINNING! k I miss youu! but I never see you because we have messed up schedules :O
Harvard baseball team>>>>
Work it! RT : spinning tonight. See you there.
Museums & are like two peas in a pod. Looking forward to a busy last hour on the phones with Reynolda friends for
By creating a commercial startup you also create social startup by creating high value jobs, benefiting the society
#Occupy folks - ESPECIALLY people of colour - need to get down with anti-settlerism or we continue to alienate indigenous peoples.
Happy bday to my good friend TimO. Funny to say it here because he's not on Twitter or Facebook. Know what? I think he's on to something...
Niu Valley Middle with
RT : Julie Andrews laughed at my joke and leaned in towards me. We are best friends now.
Facebook = Social-network? NO! It's an online-market!
not having my phone <<<<<<
HuffPo "PRIMARY PAIN" thing reminds me of RNC's "Fire Pelosi" imagery from 2010.
My love is in the Galapagos. If you somehow get this message before you return, bring me back a tortoise. Thanks.
Faith is more an act of courage than it is an act of knowledge: Alan Hirsch, The Faith of Leap
vanilla ice cream and chocolate syrup, one milkshake, two straws.
are u ready to get FUCKED UP? Lol
Is it okay if I do it tmrw cause I gotta go to bed:)
How have you been?
I'm so glad my assignment is due tomorrow and not today. I was running out of time.
#Baltimore,MD we need a Hunger Games advance screening!!
Thanks everyone for joining! Exciting
Holy crap - that's a great deal! Definitely interested, thanks for letting me know about it! :)
also those players were allowed to leave cuz transfer market was so cash rich u couldn't turn it down?! Beckham same deal.
a "total recall" remake? tight
I tell myself when Im lookin in the mirror, face it and walk away cuz you're no heartbreaker
looking good!
I'm sure he does. He's also a Red Wings fan so he isn't THAT bad, lmao
Engagement requires conversation. And good conversationalists always talk more about you than themselves.
Yeah, and a few blitz calls as well.
Can't wait! RT Just learned in news mtg abt potential BREAKING info that could develop in time for 10p tonight on
...except for the scattered guys in Argentina soccer jerseys.
RT : SKC>Yankees "Will be interesting to see who draws more..."
In Visual Resources Roundtable at #saa11 Also hoping for good summaries and tweets from AT/Archon
welcome to Twitter!
right chyea come to richmond
oh I bought a ticket lol they didn't take it
Me to the guy at Subway: "How's the new Pizza sub?" he stares at me and goes "I don't eat cheese"
see a doctor. quick.
The old bowl system.
Good run stuff by Markelle Martin
Never Say Never :)
RT : Make sure to arrive early tonight
Always Smile Bro! Follow Me! #BelieberBoy 43
FOX sucks.
The bigger question is, how much longer will Kim be on TV?
Happy Monday Morning, Twitterers! We're kicking off our Next Actors teen #audition workshops today at High School of the Arts
bout to head to my auntie house so i can eat
:-) RT : RFD happy to be involved in Happenings in our hood is where it is at!
Casting new reality show! Have a friend in a destructive relationship? Email your story:
Stop being jealous because I'm actually happy. You thought I was going to be sad? Yeahh well I'm not :)
More prep football action in the Hollow tonight! Lincoln Cardinals kick off their playoff run against the Gresham Gophers at home...1st qtr
George W. Bush just depicted how most core Republican "compassionate" conservatives support severely conservative
#np jah cure-what will it take
Any great fall recipes out there?
please tell me your going to be home for mifflin.
sorry, unfortunately justin bieber wont be coming to kansas city anytime soon. i'll keep you updated when I hear something
no I won't give up on us,even if the skies get rouuughh.... asdghjkl I LOVE YOU AUSTIN. ♥
peel'n off the police decals takes hella courage... precise engineering... and a dope ass getaway bike...
LOL!! Aww. I just love that song. It's one of my favorites.
#iDoit2 living the American dream
Awesome! We're always open to feedback.
Great to hear Sarah!
Tomlin with a STRONG outing! Great to see him pitch well!
Was up Twitter ain't been on in a min
It will Rain. There will be pain. Trouble will come. Understand. But count on joy. Morning will come. The Sun will shine. Keep ya head high
Happy Mother's Day from all of us here at ATM! What are you doing to make Mom feel special today - and every day?
Elevator rides with other people are so awkward....
Who needs NBA when we have #KU basketball?!
any numbness or tingling? Swelling might indicate compartment syndrome
Today is International Day of Awesomeness, which happens to coincide with Chuck Norris's bday. LOL! Celebrate your awesomeness today!
#fact about the #8 It is 7 + 1.it is the number associated with Resurrection and Regeneration, and the beginning of a new era or order.
So when you're lost and you're tired when you're broken in two..let my love take you higher cause I, I still turn to you..I still turn to u♥
To the 9yo lad who looked me in the eye to tell me why he likes my daughter: "She has a cool dad, & she's nice to me." Well done, young bro.
I'm so very worn out and tired right now
his outing wasn't that bad. He was better than Kuroda, but he was hooked too early. Hopefully he will get better next start.
Has anyone tried yet? Eager to hear reports!
It's time to be happy again
I need to see you guys play!!
its all good lol
Social Savvy Elite #smbmad #ford -
help us Lord! I have my music on and can't even groove like I usually do lol
Brunch and a movie
Hangin' in there! How are you? :)
#MittRomney, I do not want to follow you. Please get off my Twitter feed.
dikembe mutombo speaking at 2010 college commencement. and i HAD to graduate a year early.
it was nice talking to you! I miss you all the time!
The shortest way to do many things is to do only one thing at a time.Richard Cech
Second leg matches for the Champions League starting momentarily. Which are you tuning into?
oooooohhh..... very good to know. All I have is Red Bull and well, it's gross....
Right now, your website is being viewed on a smartphone. Will you embrace the mobile revolution? #Mobile #Websites tiny.cc/moire72
Angel was an Amazing dog & Austin is probably Heart-Broken. Tell Austin We are here for him. Mahomies got his back.(: <3
it's okay. Just be on the lookout for me plz =]
“: sorry I was grumpy I lost my contact 😡😡”its ok my icecream was good, I had fun, & you get paid
Thats what I like to hear! RT : was bumpin some in his car haha
To recruit bloggers get to know them. Comment on their blogs and retweet their posts
Rest!!!!!not yet...work on commercials...Talk about that later......."Funny Stuff...like... ha.... ha"
I decided I'm going!! I think my dad may comee with me if not its jus me n my baby girl!!!! She's so excited!!;)
Dr.Angelou called him"genius--maybe"; actually,she's trying 2 get him2 admit his ignorance. And until that day--our 'beef' continues
After a week of not working out, I felt (and probably looked) like a wet cotton ball on the treadmill.
I should gossip less.
This guy has 50 and bieber carry out his belts
Josh Smith emphasized the need to stay off of his knee as he did an interview with Lisa Salters while standing.
I know. If their's anything I can do to help, let me know. It makes me sad to think about animals that are dying because of this.
I keep mine in the freezer & take them before bed. No fishy burps!
Much love back atcha!!!!!!
France was a young black student? Who's writing over there tonight?
Try some in a gin martini. Thank me later.
. Oh, kolach, good idea. Know a good recipe out there on the 'net or have one to share?
I don't believe in the hype. I believe in hard work and discipline!
Hi! Follow me and connect - we always have need for your talent!
"The era of self-publishing on mobile is over," says head of mobile publisher.
Is a proud IPad owner! How does this thing work?
Last day of the Holiday Fair, hope to see you all downtown today!
Thanks to everyone.
Art & Science? Complimentary I think, then as now.
Davinci is expanding internationally! Need a new virtual location in Spain? London? China? Dubai? Call #DavinciVirtual today.
So Stop Askin Me...About The Hoes That...I Use To...#FuckWith!!
Four Loko... Oh how I hate you!!!
Now following !
s/o to all the moms!
good morning cuz! Make it a great day and be blessed!
I need to get more active on twitter!
it funny bc its true
Yes same torta! Come back for it!!!
: How did you score this interview with ?
I know :-/, but compared to some People..gosh, I so so poor! :P .. oh, thanks!! <3
hey thanks for drinking with me I had a blast and it was great seeing you
oh yeah oh yeah?
? where U club,cafe,sweet mangoes,busboy.n.poets,where man I'm in yo cityeee
Just for fun, check out the topics you're "influential" about.
Stay tuned...the winners of the MyHeartMap Challenge announced next week!!
WOW THANKS.
I mean I want u to stay on twitter!
Specials: Soup: Beef Veggie, Pasta: Tomato Alfredo Fettuccini with Chicken, Pizza: Sausage, Pepperoni, Onion & Mushroom
Great meeting with the #CEIC yesterday!
All class, that guy MT : Statement released by Gov Walker welcoming Barrett to his "soon to be third statewide losing campaign"
thats good (y) , so what r u doing ? xD
RT: its been a long and crazy trip... 6 years with #michaelscott, #theoffice won't be the same without you. you will be missed
Congrats to all of the #40under40 honorees! It our largest event nomination pool EVER.
No WAY! It's raining out, 40°, the wind is blowing and some eager horticulturist is out doing lawn care. Dude, I need to work!
The Forum has one..1604 & 35N
Shoot I wish. Sounds unbelievable.
And the answer is me. "Dr. Jones, there is nothing you can want, that I cannot have." Or something like that.
“ As an android user, that instagram app aint shit. Dont even waste your time downloading it”
#RatchetGirls look for Boyfriends over Twitter
darn. Literally doing my show on all those dates.
so, what, like 35 cents for a zing and 45 cents for a burn?
These alerts always bring me back to 2003. ": Great Fire Update: 2000 acres 25% contained. #Great"
no, it actually does not.
It gets more confusing everyday. Sometimes it's heaven sent, then we back to hell again
"Sefl-praise is for losers.Be a winner.Stand for Something, Always have class and be humble"-John Madden NFL Coach
Tried it, thanks for the advice! My favorite was the pork ribs
if ya dun no mi ah rudegul
Masters in Info Science with a concentration in Health Info Tech, Info Session TONIGHT @ 6:30 pm. Tuition discounts! RSVP:
That's a great joke!!!
My friends suck...
brobro, I have a sneaking suspicion you're playing dif characters during the show. Is that right? The edit makes you look cray.
Hanging with the radar late on this Sunday night. Tracking showers & storms as they move into the area.
Just a fever dream? RT ": Wow, didn't expect that, Don. #MadMen" i know, right?!
On the way to church(: just 3 & 1/2 more days until summer !
January is pretty hot, but September is my pick.
In a heart beat
Help you look good out there! Keep the head down on the downswing
Not a bad little video-- like the funny bits. Nice job,
Of course u and ur friend can sit next to me, undergrad. It's not like ur pointless and stupid conversation is gonna bother me one bit. Nope
tiger shot 74.. just fyi
Did you hear about the monster who had an extra pair of hands? Where did he keep them? In a handbag.
I just fly Southwest. Or I comparison shop on Kayak
Confession17: im looking for a girl to plant seeds and have babys
#MyPastRelationships sucked. That's why they're.........wait for it.........PAST RELATIONSHIPS!
You're too nice! See you soon :)
best wishes
you think any chance my #Ravens lay an egg today vs #Browns ??? No chance, right???
Yep! I'll follow your lead. ;)
It's raining..I forgot what that looks like!
its the simple fact , why put it on twitter it was our own personal conversation. Twitter don't got nothing to do with it.
I just going to throw this out there. 49ers Super Bowl Champions.
Everybody. Don't be gay, and check out ISOLATIONIST. Pretty tight music, and some cool dudes.
Cleaning up the logo and making some business decisions today with
Engage w/ lib users, offer them exquisite lib care & experience, mitigate risks to alt. sources of info
" Yes, I'm a girl. I get jealous sometimes, I push doors that say pull, I wish for love at 11:11 and when I say I love you, I'm not lying.”
If you love One Direction, you need to go follow NOW! help get her some more followers! thanks guys! :)
Giving Amazon Mechanical Turk a spin. Such a cool name.
RT: The has made my cant miss list. I love this community of people. #Ideation12 //// AGREED! Amazing!!!
thanks for the invite! Lol
I don't always drink beer but when i do i prefer dos equis. Stay thirsty my friends. lol
aww never feel awkward to say hi to me! I'm like the weirdest person ever myself, haha
Going to be at the game with us Friday night? RT by end of All-Star game for your chance @ a free DAP #Orioles hat.
I've used them many times, but as it's run by volunteers they aren't always online when you list. keep with it, worth it!
When I only begin to read, I forget I'm on this world. It lifts me on wings with high thoughts.
that literally makes me hate everything.
Getting a pedi 💁💅
Naked & Famous concert
thanks for the follow Corey!
I see you boo
Good recap but off on MD. Don't get hype ab some pretty girl, spoiled by Daddy then Don, whose had 1 good idea
Orgs scared were not relevant in social media
catch up dinner with
to a room FULL of marketers. crazy.
these guys have great customer service!
Daryl my favorite though lol(most realistic)..Hell on Wheels is very* good. Dark.. lots of plots. Miles O'Brien is a great.
Tell Qaddafi "Welcome to America", its not like we have a border system that can be control, free welfare, heathcare, jobs
hi chris. i'm working on a mobile/web project and need some design/creative help in exchange for equity. interested?
They act out and scream at umpires too
You should go to disneyland in july cuz thats when me n my Bestie Chelsea are going and I would Die to meet you! WeLoveAriana
Did it hurt when you fell from heaven because have sex with me.
You asked for evidence, is that inadmissible in this court?
I'll stay tuned. Keep sippin', lady.
Pat Summitt steps aside with dignity and class. When asked to comment, Bruce Pearl said: "Here are your groceries sir."
Awesome. Only 2 hours...
OMG what's your problem tonight?
RT : Learned a lot about composting from & eco-driving from at today's Lunch & Learn!
Big Shout Out to Leuzinger HS Football Coach Ron Jenkins. Coaching staff HELMET-FREE-TACKLE Certified in 2012. Accountability in Action.
The Sixth Principle of Kwanzaa is Kuumba (Creativity).
Sittin on the bench. CUZ I DON'T EVER PLAY.
you ok?
Probably? For New Year's I may need to bring a cousin in tow. But we're BFFs, so it should be cool.
Haha wow, men can be dorky sometimes!
Catch NBC 15 tonight during the 5 p.m. news cast! We'll be on with details for Evening at the Casino, only three days away!!
Ok, thanks!
no man bro's home from college so were goin out to dinner
Lovin' Vegas today. Its a good GCL day. (Gym, Charbroil, Laundry)
Stop by and grab some Sushi, My President. 1620 Market St. Downtown Denver's Sushi HQ Sonoda's Sushi LODO
is there presale?
it's looking that way. At this point its probably Matt Flynn or bust.
Great news, #FringeBinge -rs! To make our marathon an even 47 hours long, 4x11 "Making Angels" has just been added to the schedule!
i hope i will get to meet you soon maybe during the summer that is my life goal to meet you love you bella <3 : )
Lebron James will be named NBA MVP, wow good way to tarnish another award....
My tweet number 100 goes to for being such a good role model and inspiration and for reached 200k Mahomies today!(:
Watching these annoying ass lil niggas, reminded me how much I hated it
Heading out to the track to watch FIL and Indy Car qualifying, ALMS race and to top off a great afternoon, Joan Jett.
Thank you to the people who have tried to sabotage my success and work. Adversity was just what I needed to help bring out new talents.
thank u:)
When I wake up I don't feel like I do when I'm with you. (OracleAndTheMountain)
That awkward moment when a so called "Directioner" ,gets mad at someone for calling the boys gay...
I had to make the assumption that you were around a lot of black people... Which one are you at?
Anxious to get great blogging tips from at
I believe it can hold 40-50k, so no, but the idea is that by adding another PAX you spread out the attendance a bit.
$2.50 Lakefront tastes like full price
Feeling tired? Take time to stretch and relax (<5 min can do wonders!)
I was just about to but then I saw ur tweet that you were gonna eat so I'm like nahh, shes already full lol :p
is in search of InboxZero this morning - the bottom is there somewhere (I think!)
RT : Obama's budget goes down 99 to 0.
ISTA supports due to issues that fall thru cracks - cyberbullying
reason y u blocked me?
I am listening to dubstep
ah I'm jealous! What grade are you in?
You don't give away Three First round picks and draft another QB in the
Rec'd a Thank You gift basket from today! #SoSpoiled #I'mNotSharing
My school offers a Senior Year Project option - take 2nd semester off for a large independent project
the dream was too too weird to explain in 140 characters or less, a lot of running but I didn't get eaten
Being better everyday never push my self so much like this before
Hoppy Sunday! We are taking the day off; Hope you have a good one! See you Monday 2-7!
Oh, to be a kid again.. fml.
How do I take an Honors Course? Will it appear on my transcript? Answers to these questions at our Club Rush table! Stop by and talk to us!
ect* Physical copies will also be available online for purchase (:
wow! the thought of relaxing and doing nothing is really bumming me out
That's cute we'll come on over
Monday full of doctors offices but I'm still handing out business cards! Moving forward!!
and chocolate. RT : #AGirlDeserves a guy that treats her right.
they suck.
having one hell of a season. Should Boogie be on Team USA?
#ThingsGhettoPeopleDo each other
Me: did you know that a platypus has two heads on its penis? Mom: haha they must be very active. *LOL*
Holloway-Attaway How can we use our affective experiences with texts to create and share our own collaborative practices?
it's because we bananas love you <3 I love you onision :P
Find someone who can make you laugh when you want to cry. Someone who holds you at your weakest, and loves you at your worst.
yes! very soon! and hopefully it will be GORGEOUS out!
Thanks for the tweet ! Soon you'll also be able to get us live on your mobile devices. Stay tuned & Thanks for Watching!
Or Ruger I suppose.
What the deuce is this Twitter? So and So and So and so and 49 others have stories for me email? One of these tweets is from May 9th
wow my coffee sure taste differenct from an hour ago what the heck happens to it as it sits? lol
no not at all just wondering where all the fans came from that's all
My Kindle Fire has the Hanging with Friends Cheat app available, but it doesn't have the Hanging with Friends app. Huh?
#Question Who is your favorite Phillie?
would like to get some sample pens for my classroom? Is that possible!;)
Imma be exhausted in the morning, just great
is there a number I can call to actually get help?
I don't know about you, but I always appreciate the warm and caring messages I receive from large, multinational corporations on my birthday
: RT : Rivera said he decided in his hotel room last night that this isn't the end. "Miracles happen," he said
Hey fans/soldiers, Keep Calm & Carry On. Eddie will be fine & the band as well.
Life is a book and you are its author. You determine its plot and pace and you—only you--turn its pages. – Beth Mende Conny
Text DAL173 to 61721 right now to help win a Dallas Observer Music Award! If we win, $10 off tickets for 24 hours!
u lock awesome baby, for real.
Should Obama waste his time on the Olympics?
I'll only have a brief layover in town the weekend of the IIT Hackathon, but will try to get there for a while!
Just Walk has a new website! Please tell your four-legged friends to get on the internet and check it out. Many thanks to
is it cold in my house?
haha.... just for you.
lol. Well, again, congrats. Alternative medicine or not, 90+ pounds lost is awesome!
If you refer to your #ChristianLouboutin heels as 'red bottoms,' you don't deserve to own them....
Congrats, on an amazing race this weekend!
Micheals last day episode of the office still gets me
RT So I'm sorting through the collection basket booty and I found..ready for this?... a hermit crab & a tooth! WTF!
Okay those tiny chihuahuas are cute....
anything that's not in tip-top condition and bring it on over! If you don't have time to wait, you can just drop off your gear too!
Also friends tweet at us and say whats up Yo ya dig...
It would be seriously cool to get a cash windfall right now. C'mon windfall. C'mon.
make a new cover :)
I want a weird al accordion
I stop RT alot cuz my grandma told me she was tired of seeing dat shit on her timeline. So just search my mentions.
Sorry dear, long week of holiday/family festivities! I'm going to Bikram Sat. 8AM, let me know if you're interested!
Day 1 0750: Just spent 15 minutes sharpening pencils.
a thank u is good :p haha
Emotionally: I'm done. Mentally: I'm drained. Spiritually: I feel dead. Physically: I smile.
I wonder if Liam Payne uses sporks..bcuz yanno its half spoon..
Oh my goodness I think I'm on caffine overload! I feel like I'm super charged and my mind is in full throttle!
Watching the Leonardo da Vinci special on right now! Super fascinated. We've followed this since studying in Florence! -CK
Tired, awesome fun with the amazing team on
People can temporarily fake it, but In order to get what u want u have to be willing to do what nobody else is willing to do.
josh you dont got friends
Thank you and same to you!
I love the signs on LA highways that tell you how long it takes to get to certain places. Reminds me of waiting in line for a Disney ride
That is just awful. I'm speechless.
How many servings per jug?
Tiger considers following Kevin Na in advertising a namesake element on his shirt,but he cant decide if Argon or Radon is the better hot gas
Next time I see him I'm taking a pic!
Hey Everyone! Some person is posting horrible things about you...
You get my Facebook
Craig Gentry of the #Rangers has successfully stolen every base he's attempted - 14 out of 14 - the best rate in
RIP Joe Fraizer!!
In the end, we only regret the chances we didn't take, relationships we were afraid to have, and the decisions we waited too long to make.
hahaha I know I need some inspiration in my life...yet you choose to reply to one that is not inspirational?!??
:) RT : #winning! re: But, like veggies, it's good for you! RT : Hill running is not fun
is so what i needed on such a chaotic rainy day. it is a must visit site. simply lovely.
I'm good all day till 6:30 presentation then I'm done with that class
Watching this weird but interesting movie call perfume
I wanna try a placebo experiment on someone
What's up ;o)
I aint even gone lie and say I got hacked, I bet u make noises
Will li'l Timbit be welcomed by his siblings Dunkie and Krisp, I wonder?
ok brofers can we go on a mystery tour
Oh GREAT!!! My tires may be dry rotted......
cheer up champ, your beautiful.
That one text convo from last night >>> 😏
: thanks for RTs and follows!
can u been my 300 followers plz I woud really be happy thanks : D
I ship you with Zayn! omg, you guys would be the cutest couple .. :o
Vote today! Polls open until 8pm..Let's demonstrate with high voting numbers just how politically engaged we are in WI!!!!
i hate those moments when my sister tries to tell me about her hw and i really just cant be bothered cos i want to go to bed
says he'll hold 50 community meetings and will have equitable distristibution of infrastructure dollars.
i think you dig our new stuff :)
(1/2) I grew up rooting for Maryland players and Jordan of course. When the bullets moved to DC....
We're all in this together.
#Weeding in the BFs. Some dusty stuff in there.
Today, we raise our voices for all who risk their lives for the idea that no one should be silenced.
The Blue Angels are ripping through the skies this afternoon.
Agree. Sometimes level of HS competition does matter.
Dreams r our fruit of life, its our job to make them alive, once we stop having them we stop living and start dying. Chance your dream
you are only allowed to date nice jewish boys.. so not avi lol
Ok now will the REAL fight ever happen? And we all know what I'm talking about.
Another BSB song?! I need to start shopping at your Ralphs.
#FF Best sources for #WV News on twitter:
Man they really are charging aren't they?
I just printed my boarding pass to a PDF and some strange Southwest logo watermark showed up. Is that supposed to happen?
So many subscribe 2belief English &math can b learned outside meaningful context. Skills not learned in isolation!
hello beautiful followers(: ~ helen :)
Meant to say- theatre games , cobalt 500
up an hour ago- couldnt sleep- thinking of you.
Karen - "I just don't want anyone to get hurt." Rebecca - "Well then let's get out of show business Karen." - Best line
Another kick ass spin class... Waiting for the sauna/steam room to reopen to relax my muscles. Then errands/Car wash. Drinks(later)
Good excuse for a coffee break...
So over living in Seattle. Europe take me back.
Bored in english &loves hoe the teacher leaves us haha free period
happy high five day!
and Surfers are so dope! Hang loose boys!
just realized im in avi.
Twitter's suggestion engine is terrible if it asked me to follow
Enjoy the day!
I like the Oxygen Show: Snapped
I hear that. It's all shiny outside.
I just threw up wow.
Happy Birthday!!!!
The #EnergyEfficient ROOF SOLUTIONS products we use deliver reflectivity that meets or exceeds Cool Roof Rating Council (CRRC®)
Tell us, what song should DC jam to?!
Damn. It was the MCL for me. ACL is fine thankfully. RT : But let's not blow out our ACLs jumping to conclusions
you are salty as hell!
Time to chill :)
digging in to #OpenID & #OAuth on #appengine thanks to
you crack me up. "it's about the site, not me."
There should be a sarcasm emoticon
did they allow open communications? If so, did a lot speak?
What cooler than being cool?
JEEZ!!!!! How many people were there? :o
Thanks for the RT! Have a great weekend-
you should follow me that way we can direct message all day long and become best friends! :) That way you can do something!
Just another amazing day. RETWEET if you feel the same way. #ColeHart #Atlanta #UrbanFiction #Streetlit .
Jesus saves.
Fuuuuuccck! My mom's boyfriend is a dumb mothafucking beaner man! So is my mom for listening to him. Stupid people in this world.
Survived Fargo blizzard & now safely in Minneapolis.Grabbin a late dinner @ 8th St Grill.Marketing kickd my butt 2day. #beer&burgerplease
Balance the informed intelligence of your thoughts with the practical effectiveness of your actions. Thought without action is not worth mu…
Aw man, I'm working that night. Is there any other time that might work for you?
Jane Lynch looks great -- and launches into lesbian comedy bit.
hey! I'm back on twitter, I donated a photo to your Dad's auction for charity at Harley Davidson :) How are ya?
Wishing you a beautiful day. May this day bring you Joy, Gratitude and Rebirth as we enter the New Year! Much love and blessings!
Man this thunder lakers game feels like its coming on way too late, damn west coast games
I really need some sleep.. If I don't get some sleep people tend to bother me:/
So I thought I would take vacation only to find business picking up. Mo money mo money mo money
For that negative comment I sneezed so hard I felt like I broke my jaw and rib -__-
Yay #OctFC RT : A big welcome to our new team member , another good follow in the celeb/brand space
And I REALLY want an opinion/answer to my question plz
“: have a good time kids” thanks BT, wish you were here with us.
we didn't say ALL cases are bull, just that people use it as an excuse... duh!
Dick Clark dead at 82. Yet he'll continue to do the countdown on New Year's Rockin' Eve. It's in his will. Sorry Seacrest.
MUSES: I think CORNY FAMILIES are adorable u know the kind! Dey give each other prizes&ribbons 4 stupeshit like: "BEST DRESS FOR THE WEEK"!
Get ya shit together, bro.
Should I hoop next year ??
ESPN should take sports nation off the fucking air the hosts are clowns and don't know wtf they are talking about shows a joke
finally saw #TheAvengers. My god, it was an assembly line of awesome!
after watching mratha stewarts show for 5 mins, ive come to the conclusion that we are complete polar opposites.
Is it me, or is automatons really creepy?!
1) buy cheese 2) melt cheese 3) eat cheese
yeah! they can be best friends! awww.
Lol!! RT : This fool wins the award for idiot of the year!!
BIG Dolphin weekend continues TODAY at 1pm when Coach McCord and the Womens Lax team hosts Siena at 1pm in 2012 home opener!
Low-Cholesterol Recipes: Four Bean Salad 4.62 / 5 Stars | 11 Reviews by Kathleen White "If you are a bean aficionado, you'll love this sa
Friends with Benefits Party is tonight! Live art, performances, DJ, Raffles and drinks. $10 donation www.turkeyandfriends.org for more info!
Finally done studying! Listening to some Justin Bieber before going to bed.
Ratatouille is a fantastic film
RT : RT : An inspirational, heart warming story about a new mothers journey through breast cancer....
cause its funny. and true!!! except for the drug part i stopped!
Send some cool bands my way my pandora needs some more flavah
Morning. Rough getting that energy up today but gotta 2 it. I cannot wait 2 view a lil rome tennis later. Curious about that 105.1 interv.
France is nice to but Prague is the place to go visit lots going on there.
your guesses are all wrong so far so here's one last clue: betudonthavetolooktoofardowntheOPRratingstofigureitout
Stay strong New York! Portland is with you!
how ya doing??
It isn't possible to love & part, you can transmutate love, ignore it, muddle it, but you can never pull it out of you, Love is eternal. 
Another day another dollar.
just trying to figure out if my sister should do modeling with me?? What do you think look on my timeline please yes or no
wonderful wig!
Who else be laying in bed all comfy, wondering if it's worth it to get up and go pee?
Madonna just sacrificed herself for world peace
I want to sleep in but I have work.
Thank you for the birthday wishes! Excited to spend my birthday tonight amongst my closest friends. See you tonight!
#FOLLOWMEKIANLAWLEY i voted... I deserve it
Everyone defends her hair. Nobody defends her idiotic statements.
RT : We're about to start the live U-Stream of my cupcake decorating demo at the event!! Watch live here:...
That's amazing fabric! Did you design it?
I'm always a little ahead
They're awesome. RT : Yay for Easiest way to get rid of old sofas, *and* they'll get it to charity. Worth the $$.
Partly cloudy. High chance of PR! RT : Manhattan Half in less than two weeks! What's your weather prediction?
Congrats LeBron James... Here's your Kia & a trophy!
at least it was your undershirt, underwear might have been a little more uncomfortable
This is the perfect spot for me today to get some blogging done. Hoping to head over soon!
haha that happens to me all the time! XD
Defeat never comes to any man until he admits it. -Josephus Daniels
Twitting, watching tv.. at the same damn time... Lol
nytnyt and sweet dreams buddy caroline~ hope you had a fab day~ love you so much my dear buddy <3
Is anyone else getting a lot of Romocalls? I guess things must be pretty bad in Dallas.
So many more iPads at this year's #podhbcu conference!
God I love archives. #saa10 reaffirms this for me year after year.
I really like the injection of two highly motivated mid-major (hate that phrase) coaches for UofL. Avoid complacency after a huge run.
Social House Tomorrow night!!!! Setup your reservations thru me and you'll get 50% off your bill on Wednesday Night! 7027506103
no Saturday is safe!
Well im leaving for Wisconsin tomorrow morning..... Whos going to miss me? probably no one O: o well
Finished cleaning the bathroom. Now I need to mop :p
Going on a romantical date with
So Vampire Diaries is tommorw #GottaLoveTeamStefan :*
RAN BITCH RAN HE GOIN TO EAT U
dang. My mom lives 1 hr and 20 min. I live with my bf's mom.
Ate..now I'm sleepy again
Tweeted that yesterday! GREAT MINDS =)
why can't you??
A #BFMusicFactoid - today in 1987 #U2 filmed their video "Where the Streets Have No Name" on a rooftop in #LosAngeles,
I thought Ike desegregated the army?
I am thankful that my brother knows how to cook a delicious turkey!
This Celtic Philly series is freaking good!!
O I bet! I tried learning but I was too nervous. Automatic for this gal ;)
any alcoholic beverages when you saw that #UFO ?!
thank you for your check-in on Foursquare! We hope you enjoyed your time with us in San Diego!
Why when we have our own opening in a few days?
Ohh hells no ! You like him ? You have to go out with him !
Early nominee for "Worst NCAA Tournament TV Driving"award: left last two seconds of a 1pt game to see first half of FSU-StB. Rook.
Faer: "Students caught up in court are 3 times more likely not to graduate"
Pas The Day! “God Is In The House” – Isaiah 6:4 God can shake things up without even moving. What a mighty God we serve! Be Encouraged!
Nay Nay!
I will never speak to you again if you wear one of those!
Thanks for brunching with me. Together we make the best Mexican EVER!
After disturbing the meeting and abandoning my pursuit I did in fact manage to get the top level off and get caffeinated. :)
#youmakeme want to laugh and smile : )
Answer e-mails from junior people before senior ones. Junior people have further to go and tend to remember who slighted them. N. Taleb
This game is going exactly as I thought it would.
G You Tweekin. Them Be Banging.
Boston loves what American Idol brings to itunes lol. Keep it up!! Follow back?
I was drinking on that pinnacle & yeungling beer or some shit like that lol
The first-serve tank finally ran on empty. I say Seppi closes it out. (In other words, there's hope, Isner fans.)
It's Wednesday afternoon. How's your week going?
Ah, my oh my you are the fakest of them all!
Barely any hw tonight!
I'm off to bed. you should email ! He's like the dev team evangelist.
RT The #InternPro chat was lively
Follower number 70, heck yea! I'm moving up in the world :p
is glad is able to make it.
Super excited to connect with you all again :)
It so hard to change ur profile pic on an ipad
Super Session 100+ hands raised when asked who was playing Halo. Second Life: 30 raised hands.
Soo who has a gif boom? I only have like 2 followers...
Great picks :)
Before you criticize someone, walk a mile in their shoes... That way, when you criticize them, you're a mile away and you have their shoes.
Thanks! I still can't believe I'm in Belgium. It's all so surreal!
Yes. At ramming speed.
Richard Meier & Partners talk about how Aztec pyramid architecture influenced their new Mexico City skyscraper: bit.ly/wZELOq (via )
Don't get me wrong my thoughts if I'm mad can be somewhat illwilled but I got nothing on some of y'all
lol i'm speaking the real! might get a purse or sumn ha
Glad you enjoyed it! RT I'm at a great seminar for #NFC at #DSE2012. Thanks to for informative captivating discussion!
if You Wanna know SomeThing :: Askk Bitchh
Just sent of the first of many, many payments toward my grad school loans. Oh sad day.
Sounds like a friend of mine
These campaigns are so carefully stage-managed; I desperately want one to come down to a convention floor fight
it was totally fun! Can't wait to hang with y'all again soon!
All branches of University Libraries are closed today due to the UNM closure.
Seems like we should be at a #nats game today given this weather!!! :)
Every time I hear the song 'How Will I Know' I think of starting high school. OMG, am I old!
We reached the Climax..
My time at is just Great. The wait staff is great. Very knowledgable.
I was totally digging "Spunderground" last night w/ Bomb Shel. Driving some teenagers around and they were into it too.
it has only been like 10 hours since you told me...still coping.. Sorry..
Skipped an open-bar(!) company Christmas party to sit with the edit. #filmmakersarentallowedsociallives It's starting to feel like a movie!
Getting ready to head to Miller Park. Opening Day is always fun even if you're working it.
I,m lovin my old Ibanez BTB 6 string more+more! the stock pickups and factory 18 volt preamp are SUPER!!...I love this(non-boutique) bass!
yes I like frozen yogurt, but sometimes I got to have my ice cream
why u say that
Keep hope alive... You've got a better chance of GOOG or APPL buying them and getting a stock bump then.
a known entity is someone who has success in museums, with curators, directly with collectors, with critics, etc. So yes.
It definitely is!! I've been doing it for 36 years:-)
Don't you dare listen to her!
Watching Austin & Ally with my sister
i miss someone , someone to take me how
Good morning world..... Finally off work.... That had to be the longest 8hrs of my WHOLE ENTIRE life! Lol
it's all good Thanx for the return following
Hell of a time to teach us now...
Hey thanks for tweeting my article on !
I guess I should start on my presentation for my speech tomorrow.
how u been?
Just saw Philly got eliminated by NJD; I will sleep good tonight
Maybe im in love. Oh well.
probably not within the next half hour... wanna go at like 12? I'll probs be going to Miller after.
Otp watching laugh at my pain
Something scary happening at #140cuse people actually talking to each other IRL #yikes. Thanks Great meeting
Dude! is all over the news. So proud! Keep up the great work.
Who has a good suggestion for a cheap but delicious cocktail for the lake this wknd?
Short version: You're hogging the Internet! Do a crossword or something! Isn't it almost 0400 there?
IN MOTION PERFORMING ARTS CENTER WILL BE :) OPEN :) MONDAY FEBRUARY 20TH FOR ALL CHILDRENS AND ADULT CLASSES!!
I love this! If it's OK, can I post it on my blog?!
SAME HERE! #topofthe4thpage once i get to the top of the 6th page, i'm stopping. i can't do this
Sitting here tryna figure it all out.. Hum.. LOL =)
My dog scratched me.....
makers of sweater vests everywhere will be disappointed.
It�s great to be great, but it�s greater to be human
And what should that tell us about the nature and function of public debt? Outrage against those wars? Very little.
Monday morning meeting - at least someone brought donuts!
I bet! Well early congrats and give T a big happy birthday hug for me
Aaron Rovan connects Newsies to Street Arab trope in 19th Century Children's Literature.
get up get down, three steps down, my dj gonna break it down.. :)
Just secured Hamptons on King for Thursday night bar sponsor! The perfect patio for us!!!
Some people don't know what to say out of their mouths and some people can't take what they say out of it.
#Shoutout to Lebron for missing them #Clutch free throws lol
Told by a #cle restaurant mgr that macallan 18 was "market price" at $42. It's $25 in times square. Market, my left foot.
I got nothing to worry about 😏😏😏
RT": Because i care i ended up careless."
I need a drink. And soon I shall have one.
I never thought Gabriel was all that, Washington is badder. ": she ain't messing with Gabriel Union! Nobody is!"
is going IN on AC360!
Dear Obama...if you legalize weed,you would be terrific!
i love you!!!
Nothing like feeling professionally incompetent right before a long weekend.
RT hahaha....amazing. And nicely done. / Sharing is caring.
haha yeah i know...i use it mainly to just follow and stalk celebrities...
NO iM NOT..iM JUST BEiNG HONEST..iTS A WRAP...
Tried at lunch to get on #pinterest. Site crashed twice and stole my name and email each time. THATS what everyone is excited about?
PLEASE FOLLOW ME....
its on a show called river mosters Unhooked
oy. Im slightly speechless on what is going on right now
The panda has been hibernating, but will be coming out soon!
Thanks for the RT!
has a Tom Waits song stuck in his head. Sadly, karaoke places rarely have Tom Waits.
tis a pleasure!
Engagement = Value add that is leveraged w #media buyers 'We have more than an audience, we have an engaged audience'
go with your gut the show is where it's at
love the new fish bar
Tonight... DRINK.EAT.DANCE @ THE ATTIC W/ DJ SWAYZE & ONASILE. NO COVER!
: excitement in Dublin for an all-Irish rugby match this Saturday at Twickenham. Leinster to win???
I just pimped out a trash can with stencils
true, but it's more common for tweeters to ask athletes/celebs for retweets to be satisfied, not even a personalized message lol
Nathan Sykes from The Wanted looks just like Christian Beadles just an older version (: MEGUSTA
Yeah, you walk in they get you to buy one then put you in line. They said nothing but books but he was signing other stuff.
KMA is very proud to continue to be part of your music. Keep it up bro, the record is great!
Can't make it through this game.. Work early . Hawks game tomorrow need to b awkae for :-)
Releasing the first of five videos from The HotBox sessions tonight.
Best album of the year.
Dear teacher, When 90% of us fail, it isnt because we didnt try, its because you're a terrible teacher. Sincerely, your students.
just used the word goody. I was reverting to my 12 year-old self.
Happy Monday, hope everyone had a great St. Patrick's Day weekend. Save 17% off in-store or online with check out code. IRISHLOVE2012
Prayers sent!
Ice Ice baby??? Is this wack song night??.
Miller punch-top can. Nice. No one can devise a solution in search of a problem like a beer company.
Thank you, Scott.
If I'm the father of the graphic novel, I want a paternity test. - Art Spiegelman
God answers our prayers. He reveals things to us, which we can choose to Explore or Ignore!"
*eyes glaze over*
THE EVIL HAS FALLEN!!! This is why you don't celebrate befor the season starts. Heat+Big3=Not so much lol
that's OK. I was a little drunk and ended up watching quite a few walking videos.
I have such a big heart, and so much love to give - yet I have no one to give it to.
Squinting makes the pupil smaller to let in less light. It doesn't damage your vision.
1st real laugh 2day RT makes big push for #BuffettRule: "Some people claim there's a woman to blame. I disagree."
Go follow she follow back,!
haha I'm not..just saying bernys,have a nice night.
40 days have past this year and my home town has had 41 murders somethings wrong with that picture
ok i followed her LOL
Hey hey hey it's Friday, ya knoooowwww...
Any chance he wants to come out of retirement and take over for Weeks?
hey hunni how are you my love
& just leave! Lolol
That's just what Voldo needed to be less freaky: a spider on his crotch.
Good morning!
why don't you actually tweet at her haha. You going to the game tomorrow?
LOL yea u right on that and the south beach comes out on my bday I just know its gonna be pack for those
Finishing pass pages and hoping for rain so I can get the shot I need for the Sparks trailer...
I'm not judging lol **sips hot chocolate**
Ah....I see we do the same thing with different outcomes though.
that would be HELL to the YES
lol you felt left out
I couldn't be more on board. Damn this distance!
Hmm thoughts on if Metta will change things tomorrow...
Next laser tattoo removal session is due soon, it's gonna hurt, I kinda like pain b.c. it take the focus off the emotional hurt.
Yuurr the bestest of the best
how many you need and where R U located?
We'll be there
WAR HORSE.
Get live in-game tweets from the Denver vs. UNC game on
Quit crying about LeBron bc he left your team. That's old news bro. He used to be your fav player but he isn't bc he left.
I am starting the Forehead Foundation to benefit the unfortunate ppl whose forehead takes up more than 50% of their face.
Benjamin, outstanding feature
I like it but I don't buy him only speaking English all the time but apparently understanding Norwegian perfectly.
Give him the title shot NOW WOW!!!
TONIGHT I'M GONNA PUT MY BODY ON YOUR BODY PROMISES NOT TO TELL NOBODY IT'S BOUT TO GO DOWN LOL RT": #NP Beyonce Dance For You"
Feel the same bout u ladies
RT : Many brands and advertisers are clueless on social media-an opportunity for newspapers
Very interesting pick...
Bracing myself for the clearance sale already! Bloomingdale's to close
Bout to face dis blunt;
unprecedented etiquette
Electrically powered maneuverable public transportation with high capacity
no but u should :-)
what was ur experience w/ zotero? Do u recommend it or other app to database refs?
Had the soccer run this morning feels like i haven't slept in days:/
The best way to my heart is via
Yuck just saw gas in Indy for $3.99 a gallon
Have you moved to LA?
No joke...you're doing a fine job in Twitterland, tho. #KeepOn Except Charles Barkley I can't take you serious if you ...
Time out: imagine yourself resting on the wings of your guardian angel.
when do you go back home?
but I have no willpower! lol.
Friday! First week at the new gig almost wrapped up :)
hello this is carmen
Harry Potter and the Order of the Bacon.
Hey, girlfriend! Whatyaknow? Me, school librarian, you, author! So great to reconnect!
awh, I'm sorry boo! I'll be praying for you!! (:
You can find me on Instagram -
Truth. I should try to find it at the depths of a box in storage and sport it again :)
all those fairy tales are full of shit, one more stupid love song, i'll be sick.
Ok. I can't find you. Are you in a teeny little room with like 3 other people? All in jeans? :)
Yes 1 week off for turkey break :D
see my favorite people today
Facebook's search engine is the worst.
Can we help with anything?
I like that prediction Mose
Tryin to stay focussed on this bread.
Thanks for the #FF!
Volunteer Appreciation & Awards Luncheon this weekend! Exciting!
"Don't let him hit me again."Kingfish Levinsky, talking to the ref during the Louis fight.
RT : All day listening to ! #mellow #smooth #jazz #rhythm&blues
Getting full in here, and the BBQ ribs are selling like crazy, you don't want to miss this!!
Or pitino in an italian restaurant! RT : errbooddy know im comming soon like lebrons ring
I totally agree with you. However, as a tutor I am not in charge of how another teacher grades! Doesn't matter what I think!
Following other librarians makes me feel like a shitty librarian.
My pops be callin my moms his baby mama. Lmaooo
ConGRADUATION! to all the graduates of higher learning out there! Join us for a big one tonight at 11pm! Cheers!
#YoMommaSoFat She Sat On A Rainbow And Skittles Popped Out
and theoretically what natural phenom would unnaturally occur next?
Just watched 5 people get on & then immediately off the treadmill next to mine. Either it's broken or...
THAT'S WHAT U CALL A REAL FULL TYME GRIND.....RESPECT.....
let's make it happen 👌
Birthday lunch with was delicious. Now en route to get paid and get fresh for the paaaaaaarrrrtttyyyy
The Creative Visions Team spent the weekend at the Great American Food Drive's event benefiting the Greater Washington County Food Bank!
Followers...stop throwing LSU's running game in my face. This is the NFL...we throw the ball to win here.
“: Work is beyond boring. I swear I'm falling asleep.” "wake up #37, wake up!" Know that movie?
Ever had too much caffeine and yet not enough?
I better see you on this date. haha havent seen you in forever
word of the day part 2: #EXCELLENCE......We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, therefore, is not an act but a habit.
Happy Valentine's Day! I know today's all about romance, but I'm celebrating all the other things I love. I feel like making a zine....
i think Monta is a good player but he definitely has his faults both him and Martin play little defense
We are a fast growing online magazine looking for women "In the Know" in the Atlanta area- Interested in writing for us-let us know!
My first collection, I was very young, the plastic little toys that came in the cereal boxes
lol I knew that. Someone doesn't know sarcasm...
It's easy to recite a program's record over a conveniently selected amount of seasons.
You two should come drink a Hennepin on my porch
I always gotta pick my fav driver mark Martin
catch me in traffic
I have one. can i get some "Mc lovin"?
Too bad the Red Bull Air Races are on hiatus. They'd be a great fit for Speed Network and HD.
All caribbean enjoying Prestige beer at the party. Thanks to Ralph Abelard sponsoring. They love it!
“: The time is always right to do what is right. - Martin Luther King Jr.”.
Ugh. I would find that immensely frustrating. Thanks for fighting the good fight.
Thank you, Marcelle. You're a doll to say so (and it's mutual).
Don’t go to a beginning photographer, come to an award winning photographer who will create stunning images of you
They were delicious! This is definitely my go-to summer meal this year.
Weathermen in Ireland may be boring, around here our weather can get too exciting... tornadoes, floods, hail, thunder-snow etc.
Hi Ryan, did you leave a voicemail? I can check on this for you RT : Actually, I called your guys lost and....
Cloud Office and Collaboration Productivity Applications Market Shares, Strategies, and Forecasts, Worldwide, 2012 to ...
Just got the #someday!(: BEST SMELLING PERFUME IN THE WORLD!(:
Seriously I need a manicure! Construction workers have nicer fingernails:( Sheesh!!!
Gonna be tweeting from the #filmset tonight. As hours progress we will have some #funnyquotes. Plus a few
Amazing how delicious pastry can be so coercive.
Daughter"a relationship without trust is like a car without Gas. You can stay in it , you just ain't goin no where" Guess she was watching!!
Follow me please!! () Thanks
In a few minutes we'll have details on the ICE agent who shot a fellow officer in California.
the regulator by clutch
Oh, and i'm jobless! Ive just been working on stuff. I really need a job.
i hope my boo is feeling better. 'member, thugs feel no pain :) lol
it's better to open your eye to the truth and utilize the world to your advantage, than to sit there and wait to be taken advantage of...
My first semester at UT-San Antonio comes to an end. I'm looking forward to visiting with everyone this afternoon.
For our brainstorm this morning at 10:30 AM, walks in with Bacon Shakes & Tacos for all to get our creative juices flowing!
before i die i want to do something nice take my hand and i'll take you for a ride <3
Out to lunch for mothers day :)
#wearing green DVF dress, camel chie miharas and carrying new purse.
ok well what rule have I NOT followed?
Why are we still awake ? Good morning responsibility.
I took English 101 last year haha
you live for this, don't you?
Talking with folks in Seattle (during 50th of 1962), it's disappointing folks don't know world's fairs still happen...
Glass of wine in the back garden on this beautiful friday afternoon :)
Gonna be doing some freestyles!! Tracks are almost ready to come out!! XP
Are you on twitter? Get more followers and share your handle with everyone in the comments. Ours is
Snow ball:)
When I do imagines they tend to be quite long! Just so you know and If you ever want one! ~Ashley
"I'm jaded, I hate it" - John Mayer
your profile picture cracks me up haha
Hahaha dats our bbyRT : Justin just cannot stop RTing girl who says that their ovaries are gonna explode... The boy's horny ;)
where is it?
Are you a google+ user? Please invite me!
how are you, Peter Jackson?
missing my family today
I love the standing overhead press with resistance tubing with a 10 second pause at the top of each rep. Delt burn!
Just realized the #1 girl tour aint coming to miami...FML!
Well, My Birthdays Happening This Saturday :D. Anything New With You? (:
Heck Yeah! omg can't handle this wanna punch them all in their face!
gearing up for a global phenomenon
Donald Robert Perry Marquis~ The successful people are the ones that can think up stuff for the rest of the world to keep busy at.
Can't imagine why any reporter would want to receive a press release. Personalize the pitch for the reporter.
People are rough on gym teachers, but let's not forget all the years they spend in college, learning how to yell a last name in a scary way.
What I don't get is that Obama/Biden supporting marriage equality probably doesn't hurt with voters but shore up the left. So why not?
...re last: those of us who ride on it know; cheese is always overlapping on the subway
I finally learned how to pronounce David Wojnarowicz's name correctly ... awesome
Thanks for everything that you gave to me specially on Christmas ;)
My eyes are burning & itchy.
Hm, not sure. But I think there are some non-Hispanic unzombies in later episodes!
leaving for the basketball evaluations. wish me luck! :]
you still owe me a cook out!!!
not yet, but do plan on it!
PRAYERS FOR THE HATCH FAMILY BOOSIE TRIAL STARTS TODAY AT 1PM
well, happy 12th b-day skeeter! y'all have a great day! :)
Enjoy Yourself
I've been doing my epic chores and just leveled-up. I'm a Level 7 Topiary Escapee now!
Man the Timeline been boring!!! Come on twitters Tweet Tweet sum good Shit!
I love you & I'm always here for you #FriendsFaLyfee!
Collaborating with Bobby Gritz on one of the hottest twerk songs ever made. From the Bama to NY.
plzz follow me i wuv u so much i made a big sign at ur consert if u wanna txt me just tweet me bak i luv u :)
ASIA U SEXY BITCH!!!! :D lol
Only cuz you asked nice. And I hope you post porn.
wow! just moved eight inches of snow off the driveway. Another foot to come tonight...
If love feels like a heart attack , why would chase after it?!
We have to go to mosque after RT : Can't wait to take my Jewish friend to my family's Easter celebration.
Yall ugly lmao bo (throws tomatoes)
“: Touch my food and suffer the consequences.”
Lupe Fiasco, Kanye West, Muse, Skrillex, The Doors ft. Queen (I hope that is allowed)
Love it! I should be the star of my family's Christmas card next year.
Whitney Houston is dead? Where was her Bodyguard?
Your very welcome! :)
Jesus Christ man
I love all the videos that continues to put out for Electra Heart!
Love is my anti-drug
Are mirrors silver, or the color they're reflecting?
Reading Runner's magazine and benefits of dark chocolate for runners. It's high in antioxidants and reduces high blood pressure :))
Bahaha u wish
Howdy ! Thanks for the shout-out! Lookin' forward to putting our toes in the water & fanny in the sand with ya!
I wana b happy
Just like the Tiger of yore, gunning for the victory at the Masters.
stay safe today!
thanks for letting us all know you just took a poo
#dlfforum DMP Tool session surfaces anecdotal evidence that NSF rejects proposals because of weak data management. It happens!
thank you. lol
i dont fuck w a lot of people nowadays .
First trip to the capitol! Here we go!
Agreed. Thanks Laura!
Reading The Hunger Games. It's one of the most haunting and disturbing books I've ever read. And one of the best reads ever.
You know that one thing I wrote? You're right: it's actually about you.
Ah! I can't believe it!! Omg I freakin love you and always will <3 :)
Workin' today, tomorrow, and Saturday MAC Cosmetics! Come see me ya'll!
Can we get JJ and deshawn back?
thank you twin hope everything gets better :)
I honestly believe that in certain parts of America, people have started to mate with vegetables. -Jeremy Clarkson
And if you pledge $10 or more, you get a copy of their 24hr zine...
Happy Sunday! Thanks for the
Sleeping♥ & yourself? :)
OMG, STOP asking ppl on the show to get her on Twitter! She doesn't want to join! Those constant requests are why Jasika left!
Dear school and boring teachers, give us a break! >:p.
did anyone ever answer this? I have same question.
you were going to too . So tell me . Please fr fr
Good morning! See everyone today @ likemind??
miss you too sisterr. Lets pleasee do somethingg this weekend!?
traci's friend Sarah is back on the team.
kooky kooky lend me ur comb!
Great! Let us know if you need us for anything. Thanks!
RT : Don't look now but the 'Topes are red-hot! With a 4-3 win tonight over Iowa, Isotopes have won three in a row!
what's your plans for the day
Lest we not forget the 11th commandment that says "To race thy horse, it's name must be as if a 5 year old named it".
ohmygosh, no Austin don't cut the curls off lolol they look so good on yew. (;
": ithought they gave it to u already" she did... its a long story lol but I do got it
THIS IS TWEET # 400 i nevr thought that i would even have a twitter let alone LUV IT!!!!!!!!!!
That's great! Who took that?
Finally done with hw!
This new twitter app I got is much better then the one they give you.
Potential risk: now that we can micro-measure so many mkting tools, will we tend to neglect long term less-trackable brand building?
nothing much just watching ESPN...its all about sports
your $ goes to support more great art. thank u for buying !
That awkward moment when your friend is like "Are you thinking what im thinking?" And you haven't the slightest clue.
News 3 at 6 starts soon. We're talking about Peter Konz and the #NFLDraft, and has details on 3 pedestrians hit on Monroe St.
thanks for the favorite :) - who do you have winning?
Much Ado, Guthrie: Next row patrons earn a rare #WTF tweet. Ate, drank thru ENTIRE show. Crinkly snack packs, fizzy drinks. Crunch. Slurp.
Let us know how it works out for you. Much more coming soon, but we want all the feedback we can get :)
In 2013 will the movie "2012" become a comedy?
Haha! Is that the "crowd" in the seats?
Thx Arman for coverage! Glad to have participate. Look 4ward to 2morrow for speaks!
Let that shit burn!
Baguettes are on sale for only $1.00 each today at our Hillsboro Village & Downtown Library locations!
April Fools? right? i mean.......haha
you're awesome :)
If you're on Twitter then find me. leebuckner is the username...what can I say, my creativity really came out when choosing that one!
Summer needs to hurry the fuck up. Sick of school and all the shit that comes along with it.
this is about Obama's personal beliefs,but about his public policy stance, which is still evolving(not the same a flipflopping)
RT : Coming up around 8:10am: Can sleep change your life? And what's the connection to weight loss?+
If you were Sunday Brunch Party last week, then you don't want to miss tomorrow's party!!!
I want sum sushi
someone cuddle me
story of your father on #WDYTYA was awesome!
You're welcome!!
& now we answer the question: can jetlag be held at bay with a quick cycle sprint?
Been sleeping...took to the bed when I got in...
National Future Organ Donor Awareness Week. :)
See that's where you're wrong. The first step is ice cream. Yup. I'm pretty certain it's ice cream. Always.
Yeah, I finally went "Life just can't suck anymore." and now everything is good!
Research, research, and more research. That's what I'll be buried under again today, and that's not a bad thing.
its always a good morning when stops by and hangs out in your office for a little while.
Watching chipwrecked with my stepsister lol
Xcept when it's US civilians' private lives? #PATRIOT : – Openness does not have to equal hyper-transparency.
off from work today...going to Yonkers casino to play a little....hope to win BIG....
Knowledge becomes belief when it is applied in action.Without applying that knowledge, how do we expect to completely trust God?
RT : Happy Pi Day to all my fellow nerdy peeps!
Everywhere i go i'm always hearing your name.
grumble grumble autocorrect!
:D u betterr
That was me.
Happy 21st! We hope you had an unforgettable run!
only business cards. My neighbor does postcards with them an they look good. Maybe try them out with a small project.
I'm completely in a zone. Hilarious. just asked me if I felt it DOWN THE HALL from you. Not a thing. Ha. :)
hoping the va senate has more common sense.
since when is my dad ever nice to our neighbors... wtf...
Having an awesome day everyone... I'm heading off to a business development workshop in Davie, FL, If you're local DM me about it!
no longer passes the Turing Test.
don't forget talking to bearded dragons on Skype
There is no elevator to success. You have to take the stairs. - Author Unknown
Dara Torres' body is amazing. She is also a 45 year old mother. I have no excuse.
Loved running into you guys at the store haha
feel u on that one
NW: The Hangover
Jesus' enduring relevance is based on his ability to speak to, to heal & empower the individual human condition: Dallas Willard
of course
So let me get this straight over 1000 of people get cancer over 1000 of people donate over a million dollars to support cancer
Proud to have several groups from the 9th Senatorial District at the Capitol today for Wyoming County Day.
I've got the beats- dm me you email
My barista asked abt my #Teal outfit & got a #NOCCBreaktheSilence bracelet 2 help raise #ovariancancer awareness!
That awkward moment when you say bye to someone like 10 times b'cuz everytime u say bye u start talking again<3(:
my dad is so full of FUCKERY!!!
Hey....Waddup with u
hey we gonna be rollin up lol thats wassup and right though im broke as hell and i need a job lmao
Now I see the credits rollin..the end. This movie can't be over..not yet. There's no happy ending...no one said I love you. :(
This day needs to fly?
dude im looking at a display of a picture of a display of a picture. Whoa
I feel I have been fairly productive but realize I have still a lot to do.
So filling up the Camelback it is!
kinda have2 ;-), flying to europe now and back friday.. If not 2tired imma show up outa nowhere lol
I guess I'm about to go check out Africa in April...
I hope you are making time to watch the FA Cup final during he festivities...hopefully near the beach!
Today's Soups: Country Vegetable & Cream of Asparagus
great night out! Lets us know if the frontieer room changes back :)
Can any one thing affect the eventual outcome of the universe?
why do all the guys mad at you about DT look like the damn Jonas Brothers!!!
I follow back <3
Also, I love the insanity that then continues in the comments section after the BARCS stories. I feel bad for the animals.
what is that point for theatre? Is theatre even mainstream?
No love from the Friess sisters
Thanks for helping spread the word for Cravings on Clark!
Thanks Talha! I'll try my best :)
such an old tweet.. Crazy!!
RT : Check out exclusive behind the scenes photos from the recording of our live "Madness in Manila" DVD/CD at......
2NDSUCKS??...U SUCK!!!.....KNOW SOMETHING?...FUCK YOU! .l. @ bigtimerush IS BETTER!!!!!
haha so A State of Progressive House doesn't work for you? RT : " I love you, please just eat steak!"
Bibby ready to contribute to Heat's 'winning mentality'
I've got canned food, enough Ammo and Armor and transport for an extra large army, need I say more ? LOL
#fridayreads finished Operation Napoleon by Indridason and started Shadow Woman by Ake Edwardson - love Scandinavian thrillers
im following u now (: follow back ? (: <3 u Sonny !!
Looking for a Commercial Talent Agent. Please message me with your recommendations. Thanks!
Headed west Oct 4, landing in Carmel Valley. Don't know if we'll end up in LA, but it's likely. Avocados here we come
Once more w/feeling. The Paul Ryan plan. Romney's campaign. A bra without an underwire. Things that do not support you.
one if the things I love about u, is that u let me wear heels!
keep posting pls
YES you were!! I was like omg! i just couldn't breathe.Whats next justin shirtless?Or..
a great new wave band name = Special Someone and The Pet Heads
Why do some females(not me)say guys can't hit a girl but turn around and demand equality.If you want it,get slapped.Then tlk.Jus saying!!!!
Happy New Year from !
. HUGEKUDOS to for pulling their revenue stream off #LimpBaugh additional kudos for checking THEIR media buy!ThankThem
Happy Library Workers Day to everyone out there in TN libraries! Treat yourself to something special today!
The big weekend is coming up. She has no idea how excited I am
Heading to my aunts to visit/play outside with my niece and nephew:) gonna be a great day! "Knock on Wood" :P
Already looking forward to the weekend with
haha yeah cx just try ! I wanna see this xD
#IRemember meeting forever ago in a chat room. .
#supportlocalmusic Live in a few with random Folk/singers from local and mainstream artists. stop by and listen in.
People forget that tolerence doesn't mean they have to like you. They're still allowed to hate you silently. /via
"Many employers rate leadership activities even more highly than GPA? For more info., check out our Facebook page."
Before you guys think im a freak i want to let you know, We don't know what gender of cat my cat it. It doesnt have any privates...HAHAHA
oh hhaha alright !
2012 PR tip #1. When was the last time you reviewed and updated your website? Do it now.
we love u 2!!!! #Belieber from all around the world
It's pretty outside...pretty hot! Lol
AXIS RADIUS MEMORIAL DAY BLOW OUT! ENOUGH SAID! Hit me up to make the list or for table reservations $100 Bottles @ (602)882-0317
RT : Your closing thoughts in the last 6 minutes of the chat?
Wow Honey is amazing. Beyond the Sea can't get here fast enough.
Yo did he ever put up the solutions for the problems on the tests??
we will! I'm exited I've never been!
I'm glad that others are as excited as me.
Finally putting all the pieces of my life back where they belong! Getting back to a polished, put together, organized, routined person!
exactly lol hypocrites
we are gonna BBQ and watch the derby at the house. I'll txt ya. Sick Mexican grub layout by the wifey, homemade churros too!
Seeing avengers with my brother later
It's time for 50 cent beer now til close. 50 cents buys a pint of premium, Mondays nights
It happens...I am the youngest of 5 and I hate them all :)
downloading now
That worked, thanks~
Got my new glasses today. #thuglife you wouldn't understand
good possibility, u could be on to something
The quality of a leader is reflected in the standards they set for themselves
One of my authors on Writer's Almanac: Jen Vernon's KETCHIKAN WRESTLING. writersalmanac.publicradio.org/
New peanut free, tree nut free and allergen online store. Please come visit us and let us know your thoughts.
follow back ? (:
Thank You.
In 2008, 35.2 million people changed residences in the U.S. within the past year, the smallest number of residents to move since 1962.
one more class today then off the broadripple
hours away from my special painting deal!
absolutely!!!! “: good win for TU womens basketball tonight #pios”.
I would like to congratulate and for finishing their undergrad classes at WFU today.
AP: Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker will be greeting President Barack Obama on Wed .in Milwaukee, joining him for company visit
Now Trending in #highered: #dontdoublemyrate. What's your take on the issue?
Samplers at Asheville and green man brewing
Goodday at wrk great day overall back at it again tomorrow AGGA UP
thank god for google.
Bout to write a track
hot dogs
im going to make a tinychat join me
I really wish I could unsubscribe from email alerts from They are starting to get annoying.
Bay Village get in...
You don't know how badly I wanted to shoot myself in the mouth. BAD! Jess & Fadonsha were there!
On my way to the set of The Dark Knight Rises at the Steelers Stadium. Might win a car or a ticket to the premiere, maybe.
: hit the #SaltLick today and thought about your NYC bbq...hope you survived!
i cant wait until it comes out
Per you have an email distribution list? If so put me on it man!!!!
haha I can see that.
Hey!! I can walk there!!! RT Happy hour starts at 3...Brewer game starts at 3....coincidence? I think not!
Haven't been tweeting much, but back in the saddle.
perhaps a bandana instead?
I just taught my most epic bootcamp class for http//synergizerevolution.com
Whats your favorite place in Philadelphia
Watching cedar point videos! Can't wait for prom and post prom this weekend!
We all know is sitting in the front window of Monk's..
Two words that scare the crap out of me: Bikram yoga.
yes and yes...
March is the halfway to Halloween point! The whole month will be dedicated to all things ghoul/strange..Come dressed up! www.onelonetree.org
Thank you.
Friends marathon and history project! Mainly just friends marathon
If I Had A Gun #putas muertas everywhere
Watching Steph Curry warm up. Hopefully he won't get hurt like his last visit!
closest to here is 8 hours.
Ill find that wifey in 2012 better believe!!
you are Twitter's
I tried girl, I just figured you were dead or something!
news. So glad u found Wendy Clark & Love Tapes !
we woke up at the same time :)
Twitter... Ain't that some shit
i saw your sister at the y haha
DD keeps saying things like, if not prince than someone like him, if you're asking if we are looking for a power lefty...
Eric Hazeltine on the tyranny of the urgent over pursuit of the important...now @
So they kind of play off of that word which has that meaning
Toss in another vote for Ahmad "mugging receivers" Carroll
he sounds scrumsish! I like this guy. He's in track and is funny. We're exactly same age to the date. He listens to what i
That looks like an awesome position!
yep yep!
oh man, hopefully you will be early or late! Boy or girl?
just sent in our request for my personal story and mission to stop bullying starting here in Chicago w/ theatre!
so sweet have a great
you dont even know i exist but i still love you soo much <3 :) seeing you strive for ur dreams makes me so happy :)
#windtunnel should replay the infamous Despain rant... one of the greatest moments in TV history
The wealth of options in Evernote is overwhelming, the lack of options in Instapaper is currently frustrating. Will it become liberating?
If the presentation goes well, they'll leave wishing they could hear a little more.
follow me if drose for mvp
no, for reals...I'm sorry. sumtimes i juxx feel like slapping my dad...
just joined Twitter - Let's █▬█ █ ▀█▀ him w/some Followers! SHOW HIM THE $$$$$$ (whoops i mean show him some Love!) Thanks.
Instant Nestlé Classico w/milk & Cocoa Coffee Mate!
#HipHopAwards is wanna the best tv shows. kevin hart made it the bomb though.
Um, I have Wildflower Long next week... ;)
school is coming
Awesome! I'll be at the same game, ...only in the nosebleeds.
oh awesome!!! And yeah I think!!!! I HOPE I REALLY REALLY WANT TO GO
Thanks to the for making a great channel for NFL Sundays! Their b!
Making hops for a cake for the dessert table being raffled at the event this weekend, are you going?
Tableting is fun but I want my touch screne!
Are ya'll ready? Im going to do ALOT I mean ALOT of #Imagines!
Hey! I'll be sure to inform you next time I host another exchange. :)
Very true! Visiting is a key component of elder communication.
Election Night Coverage always sounds better when the board op is wearing stretchy pants.
If paul doesn't drive me to practice i'm gonna be pissed
I hate it when the 7th seal gets broken.
if anyone is interested in participating in the next session? Contact Phyllis Messenger
okay whatever
In need of some new hip hop tunes??? Suggestions please
There's a girl dancing behind the band on stage having the absolute time of her life!! Love it! Http://massiverocketradio.com
My daughter is so beautiful!! We going out today, park or mall?
Kevin Costner says "when Whitney Houston sings before God, she'll be good enough." May you share your songs with Angels.
hey there! Thanks for following.
that's cause GW is scared of you
Wow, terrible, dangerous officiating in this #Blackhawks game.
will be headlining "KylePalooza" ! DL the "KylePalooza" app for more information!!!
Happy 21st to my lady!
Hansel, he's so hot right now. Hansel.
is a boss at basketball!
yeah I edited in 7
I just don't give a fucc no more !
Yup but about this reunion tho!
People shouldn't expect HL to softball its UK coverage, but they don't have to give message-board-level insults a pass either.
Just left a meeting at #TheOrpheumTN; incredible women there doing awesome work!
Flyers and penguins series is a lot more boring now that they arent scoring 50 goals and starting scrums after all whistles
and i mean after he whitened Boston history through engravings, i figured all of the city would find him a beloved hero.
Thank God and Jesus for waking me up this morning!:)
Big takeaway from #IDSD: video, video and more video!
what supermodel
I'd completely forgotten about that gift certificate!! I'll come in when is there to say hi and collect.
Pictures: 39 New Caribbean Lizards Found
yep, but the quality financial rewards are what providers were banking on
Me 2! If mom even bumps my leash when she grabs Junior's and I hear the little bell I come flying cuz I think I'm going out.
Thank goodness all the shows are airing finales. I'm having dvr stress.
Thank you, for sharing the Snark!
Guys, let us know if you have any questions. Also, is your right hand man; email him: andrew [at] simplegeo.com
That's fucking creepy with his pedo looking ass “: OMFG MR MARITSEK MESSGAED ME ON FACEBOOK”
The best way to hang up on someone is to do it in the middle of YOUR OWN sentence. That way, they never suspect you hung up on them
Gotta block her on twitter, she seems to mess with my mind.
Cant wait!!
Fit Tip: Burn 3,500 Calories more than you consume (over time) & you will have burned a pound of fat!
aww thanks for that & the nice FB post. I was leaving right about when you tweeted
Trying to get my younger boys out the door for school, this mommy has lots to do today.
Omg louis grandma wished me happy birthday on facebook
rapping aint bout the looks
4 hours of sleep... Great way to start the day
And the new GOP Senate Majority Leader is... John Galt!
been slacking on these games smh. #scramblewithfriends #hangingwithfriends #drawsomething clearly I don't have a life lol.
what's good big dawg
Austin is now even further away from me.. There go my chances of ever meeting him.. /:
How do you know when your are in love?..
I saw your brother at the gas station a couple weeks ago .
On the way to teen hoot with .. so excited!!! 
Kobe Bryant follow me ;))).
You never notice me :( and your not gonna notice me this time either :( #iloveyouandyoudontrealise :( <3 please follow:(
I'm a total chicken in front of the camera, but is the best. Went from poultry to ham. Actors, filmmakers, etc.
Its win a wacky weasel wednesday
if you find that someone has lied to you, first ask yourself if they did so because you have taught them that they can't be honest with you.
I live in the Pearl so it was actually full of runners, joggers, short fancy looking laydees ordering nonfat soy lattes.
Did Sarah or Michelle say this?
you haven't had anyone bust it open yet for a ride though!
" ...international relations should be fostered, whether they involve language, trade, art, science, competitive play, or religion."
Thank YOU Kimberly! You are awesome!!!
You should report directly to me. If there is something they should know, they'll ask me!!
Spotted: Katniss leaving Thurston, arrows and all
because of your reaction haha
Haymarket Center's Summer Institute was a huge success. Today, Bessel van der Kolk, MD was riveting on the subject of trauma.
HAHA! Oh you know she fancy. I'm going to go ahead and say she's going to pull out all the stops ; )
Lol you must have some pretty violent/adventurous dreams!
4 MORE GO FOLLOW --> <SHE IS SO CLOSE TO HER GOAL!
Just saw Santa driving a silver pick up truck. You'd think it would be red lol
#3 What documents can you show me to prove your claims are true before I give you any money?
Connecting with the ultimate source of love is possible through discovering the hidden power in your heart.
i have some weird ass phaser effect on my hi-hats. is it weird if i throw in a 'get to the choppa!' sample from predator?
Thanks Jeff!
I hate when people tweet me this is how you can get to follow me. He already is. Stop tweeting me that
Looks like the live stream is back up, if you're still having problems let us know
yea sir!
congrats to you both. Kindest, most fun, artsyest, smartest parents in the world!
For people like you there is no such thing as an early grave.You wanted to gut my dreams till I was empty,and show everyone my remains.
Good morning always remember be a leader don't be leaded
Vanity Fair is a great magazine to read on a plane. And ladies have you seen who is on the cover. Met him in Vegas. It was love.
I bet it sucks for you bums to wake & realize your success was all a dream,now try & make it reality
Just started to dabble into writing. Let's see where this will take me! :)
Ooh, that would be PERFECT. I feel like between NC & POTUS's statement, we're entering a rly, rly important stage in US history.
follow me
RT : she was rushed to hospital because of a headache? I should live in a hospital if that's the case
RT : Idea 4today: Adding only ONE mortgage payment a year to your 30 year mortgage will cut ur loan term to 23.6 years.
i can't tell you how much i love that y'all made a chrome web store app after i suggested it. i use it often! :-)
shit man, jus been out in vegas working haha how's the band going dude
contrary to some, I'm really enjoying the current season of Mad Men.
If i ever ran into the last girl that broke my heart, i'm going to tell her "thank you" i never would have found a better girl.
is still up and agree with Craig Ferguson that we're all tired of douche-bags! Yes... can think of two I'm axing from my precious time!
thanks girl!!!!
Thanks to all the who took a stand for our community yesterday!
The right environment is essential to a successful Christian walk. Stay alert to what u let into ur life. Music is a powerful influencer!
First time I've witnessed a sailing race... Looks like a slow invasion
Beef & broccoli and Spongebob : )))))) all smiles over here.
I never have either! I am SO jealous of for going there and meeting the man himself!
Tell us what fuels you & you could win a $100 gas card! Tweet and include #ChevyFuelsPhilly & #sponsor to enter!
There is an indian wedding at the hotel we're staying at. Beautiful saris everywhere!
Toothbrush Express offers great deals on Glide Floss Holders and most oral care products.
yes! Let's get this party started already!
The SAID Principle – Specific Adaptation to Imposed Demands
I showed my mom this mothers day thing on tumblr, and I thought it was cute, but she slapped me.......
Today @ Noon on the Lunch Time Theme Park, Pay The Man! This year you had a couple of extra days to find those special deductions on your...
hope the internship career fair workshop went well! Go terps.
WE have our patio open!
and yet have the second highest pt. total in the league.
I'll be your personal aid.
No, but the "spotlight" I am in... "News" travels FAST! :)
haha, glad u made it. Im on my way to body toning class in a few min myself!
TEXT-Fitch says regulatory guidance on U.S. bank stress testing sound
Uh yeah,you gotta gimme a minute on that one...
i hate recycled jokes.
um duh wife!!!
Instagram is just there for me when there is nothing to do. 😚
i think that shane should be there because you are just that funny.... there wouldn't be any characters without you. i love you
just started to notice my strings are getting old. it's been 2 months of solid playing for this set- elixir ftw!
The links are up at www.watchnhllive.com go register and gain access to all the links to tonights games enjoy the games thanks for joining!!
Watching #TheDevilWearsPrada ! One of the best movies ever, tweet me. Xoxo
Two more days until we
Richardson beat out Wiley brown for job
I wonder sometimes..
happy 4ourth of july
oh so excited to see you ladies tomorrow!!!!!
I should be sleep right now!
imma just sit back n let my baby get me 900 tweets or more....
Special Prosecutor #AngelaCorey says that her team has found enough evidence beyond a #reasonabledoubt to charge #Zimmerman with
Q28 we have animals nicknames for all kids- monkey, ladybug and #3 is TBdetermined, lol
La griteria inside Latin American + hangover = 😲😲😲
Today has been going by so slow!
who is the best sister-in-law ever? !!
you had my heart inside your hand... :)
& chase of course ! billy is our #superhero <;
Check out the new update to the app. Now with #Edcamp and #Edcampss information and links. Download it today.
I love Jake <3
no you're the one who blew the #SuperSmackDown main event. Everything you touch turns to garbage.
thank you. Lol
Come party in Miami in celebration of us grads on March 10....you pick the venue because I have no idea which places to choose :)
thanks for the help! This will be my first of many comic-con's I have a feeling!
#ICanAdmit i look forward to tweets
its a song by a day to remember lolol
Looked at the Dallas cowboys new schedule...looks like another 8-8 season:(
so hot!!
Thanks for putting this up and thank you for all the wonderful opportunities you provide for students interested in Asia!
Wow! Some great company you have there!!
*Cupping ’s jaw, dipping my head and pressing a lingering kiss to her lips* Good. *Opening the door* In you go.
surprising thing is their record isn't that bad, just not what people were expecting, ends up lowering them in many's eyes IMO
so amazing! In love
Congratulations to Delta Routine on winjig band of the year at the 88.9 Radio Milwaukee Music Awards! Hard work pays off, boys!
Yay! A new
What the heck is up with Joaquin Phoenix? He needs to go back to acting the singing sucks.
if you read the Bible while listening to the Lord of the Rings soundtrack, you WILL feel like a champion.
that was a good part. I rewatched that several times.
...which is now the job of (producing Speakers' Forum.) Go, Rachel.
won't be the last #digitalhumanities project using Scribe, as I'm working on it for census & parish register DBs.
Does anyone know id the #teenchoiceawards are going to be streaming live from the internet? I have no cable at my cottage =_=
A day without sunshine is like night.
Come by our shop in Glendale and we'll hook it up on the low for #BearcatNation!
Nasty like a grape swisher
Depends on the kind of food. But for casual dining, I like The Porch. : What's your favorite place to eat in Dallas?
That makes us brothers then ... brother. [RT I'm pretty sure "Extremely Loud And Incredibly Close" is about my Mom.]
It's a good year for the Barely Knows. Friends and Acquaintances could use some help though.
At the library then i gotta go to work
The Sponsors we just adore!
- now you just need a picture so people don't think you're tweets are spam!
lol nah not really
this guy yelled at me something major at 12:30. He will make a hilarious appearance in my blog. Check it out later tonight.
Lunch is over...
heck yeah! love the mixes bro.. C-H-I-C-A-G-O
Remember: Crying doesn't make you a weak person, not crying when you want to, does.
Looking for some local #Boston shops to sell my gear in, anyone have any contacts?
Oh Talking Heads station on Pandora, you will get me through this day. (Fa-fa-fa-fa fa-fa fa-fa-fa-fa)
Watching Toy Story 3 again. Something got in my eye in exactly the same spot near the end. What are the odds?
After helping a visiting scholar w/ Zotero, I received an invitation to hang out in Madrid if/when I visited.
why not?
Up to freakin early pickin up dog poop and I'm still drunk from last night haha
I am not MIA. you left me. remember sadness in my heart.
NATO invites Pakistan to summit in Chicago
Good to keep in mind - articles don't need to be fully developed right away. Just need a little text to get a stub started
To easy to understand? Say it isn't so...can't even begin to comprehend!
we leave EP pizza crust!
Let's try that again, curious, what's up to this Tuesday morning in Milwaukee?
You've tweeted over 20 messages a day about Petrino. You seem obsessed. What's the difference?
My pleasure. Good stuff. Thanks for the K+ too.
Goodell has been so excessive on payton with this punishment that he is completely cut off from NFL for a year its personal
Happy Happy Birthday to ! Love & hugs! Miss you!!!
"Gratitude is the fairest blossom which springs from the soul." ~Henry Ward Beecher
YES I DO, and YES WE ARE!
Hey don't laugh!! I was totally talking serious!! Don't you see my serious face..... -__- ... ha jk :D
Disheartened by how difficult some library systems make applying for not-yet graduated folks. Do I need an equivalency to apply or not?
I'm the hungriest nigga on the block
Had three of my proposals accepted at #AECT!
I always watch it #MIOBI !!!
What a nice sunset. Great to be living in Michigan.
please follow me cause i will #NSN! and there will only ever be #Onetime when you follow me and today could be it x 16
I'd be down to sit by this heat vent all night
Yeah Right !
Thanks Sandra! I really loved the article.
The Giants said they are open to trading Jonathan Sanchez
Must be nice
Yeah, you're so important talking your techie business talk while I'm practically yelling "Excuse me!" behind you. Pfft, Seattle.
Got a long night ahead of me.. Help me!
a spark of inspiration, a much better week
Toyota Center will be sold out and LOUD! RT Home opener tomorrow against old division rival, big game!
only reason you guys will prolly have a better record is u will be healthier at the start of the season if rose/deng were..
thanks - just off the Blue Ridge Parkway near Wintergreen
I love that part of the country. The fishing is a bonus. As is pan-fried walleye.
Apparently died :( i never knew her but..... its just...too sad :(
Huge thunderstorm here in the Bay Area. I love it. I don't love that I'm going to have to drive home in it.
Miss Earth USA Nicole Kelley under fire for calling Philippines dirty and noisy on Facebook. Now trending on twitter!
Osu/Duke tonight!
Today's big question: does Mitt Romney have to answer for the fact that he assaulted a gay student at his prep school in the 60s? And...go!
Whoa Boyle nearly lost his pirate mustache on that one
special shout out We need to talk too.
Hey Lucas shares a birthday with Charlie Parker, Michael Jackson, John McCain
Feel like complete shit 😷
run around day pick up mail grocery shop... big list...def time for a vacation
Lynch: "I challenge everyone to honor him in the way you live your life, every single day of your life and never forget No. 55."
Oh, and I almost killed a girl. No, it's cool, I didn't. I said almost.
I don't know if you caught it. But during the Miami game. Someone flopped and camera cut to Stern. His expression was priceless.
You could take back that you were poking fun, but this is a good start. RT : Regret my tweeted question caused a stir. I...
“: has got to be one of the best producers out there” appreciate it Dazz!!!
same here. I miss my hometown:/
George zimmerman is a murderer and should be in jail for life. Wtf is going on. He killed trayvon martin and now is released from jail??????
Welcome as an official bar reviewer while at #sxsw. She's a rad gal, so say hello.
Impressed by at the #gk12 annual meeting
glad to share. I'm a member of AWD and am sorry I missed it!
Lol He Say He Wasnt On The Phone Wiff Nobody But He Texting Me Off And On Till 1 Some Ahaha
what's that gotta do with lying to you?
I'm tired of feeling like me chasing a dream comes with a curse.
Watching chopped after stuffing my face with turkey not a good idea. What are these people thinking? Would I be a flop? I think not.
Bracket with vs. would be tough to predict.
happy wedding day to our cindy and kyle! blues skies today for a beautiful wedding in the park. bam.
Only a couple of weeks left until our #XFactor #auditions in #Atlanta! Register online at musiccharmer.com for Atl, NYC, LA, Lon, Chi, Aust
Hey Chase---! Happy Birthday--! will Eric still have some BBQ in an hour---? 7:30ish..? (tuned into livefeed!)
#WWE #SurvivorSeries. Let's get it. What's your predictions
Overheard: "There's no crying in advertising!" (re: smartphone company's Mother's Day spot)
Thanks Paul!!
SpongeBob: "Patrick, you're a genius!" Patrick: "Yeah, I get called that a lot." SpongeBob: "What, a genius?" Patrick: "No, Patrick."
Riveting conversation on #veterans at VOA Gen Barry McCaffrey provided sobering statistics of pain for families and vet
Getting too old to pee in these nasty porto potties..
Your future is just a bunch of right nows strung together.
Must have doubled my work out laughing while listening to Matty Ice - don't think i can stomach #RCcola, but you've got my vote
Didn't need to do that n a structure as slow as it was w that # BBs. U live & learn. First bustout n last 30 days I felt was my bad. Next!
I have my own mom for that.
Good morning everyone! Have a great Monday!
haha make that 8 bottles of wine for me. I am so emotionally tied to this team my days are wrecked when/if they lose!
follow back?
Clear2Go bottles w/ filters come in a variety of different colors. Check them out at www.Clear2O.com.
Thanks all my reverb and facebook friends :-) your rock ! HAPPY NEW YEAR
"The man who does more than he is paid for will soon be paid for more than he does."
Haha not quite!
Somebody brought a bottle of "mango chili schnapps with caffeine added" into our house. Let me tell you, it works.
They crazy Going on Westbrook shirt,!
When someone you love doesnt feel the same for you as you do them, its a lost cause.
social gaming can also feel overwhelming when you have too many games going. not fun, just another chore.
YAY! My gave us a rferal to one more therapy place near us!
ha! Now I have American Pie stuck in my head.
somebody is going to have to man-up....give it a try for the first week...show the coaches and teammates ur a new man!
I wonder what our combined dues will be? Will it be called Sagtra or Aftag?
Happy New Year :)
The one tells you everything is fine when obviously it is not, is who you should be focusing on. Not who they tell you to hate Sucker.
that much of a diff? Did you see it there?
A classic indeed!
I'm contemplating going to see Vinson but I look like hell right now .
Report backfired on the teacher since most of us preferred the "trash" we chose to the "classic" she did.
#ItsHardTo believe in all my dreams, most think they are impossible. but i will never give up. it will happen, they won't be dreams longer.
I'm so tired of driving. I need a driver so I can drink and take naps during traffic.
haha I appreciate that! I believe that it is very necessary that we kick it whenever we get back to school.
hahahah oh it gets better :) I'm doing the meet & greet
wait what I'm confused! can you see this?!
can you put me down for rockpaper today, im gonna do flappers first then drive over
I just won a free movie night from !
POTUS. Everyone gets a fair shot, a fair chance! I want case studies show what that looks like in real life, FedGov going to plow even field
I actually say AND do that...
come ride with me tomorrow morning! 9 a.m.
I think & need to reunite and have a CHIPOTLE dinner date tonight!!!
He don't rep them nigga either he don't rep the state of Ohio its clear is it not RT : I'm from Akron
that's so true.
PLEASE follow me i just made this twitter :)
not due until 4/17 because the 15th falls on Sunday.
yes scratch that Game still going hard.but the test of that list fell off
Updates appreciated! Need to know when to start drinking the beer & eating food from the frig before it all goes bad.
No i say 5 this round RT : Yeah, so you're gonna sweep your way to the finals?
those beautiful teeth will be able to shine amazingly VERY VERY VERY Soon♥♥ You will be sosososo handsome as always♥
Support the important work of and their fight against human trafficking. Everyone can make a difference.
"15x15 Initiative" Update via : 11 acquired out of 15 pieces. We're elated !
If I have MS points left over from a more significant purchase and with no immediate use for it, I'll sometimes get avatar gear.
Weight Loss Forums Helpful In The Battle Of The Bulge
Moist Hearted
lol ight i been makin plenty! Who be doing yo mixtape cover?
Watching app demos at #apihackathon London.
Catching up on Idol. Hehe.
I meant ya lips but u know wat it is lol
aw you guys are so cute together!
because I'm a High Plains Drifter too | RIP MCA
So i build a motorbike in my apartment kitchen because i was bored, and it gets labeled as a death trap... haters
Had fun at formal! I love my bestie <33
Thinking about staying on the Texas Coast but not sure where? email me:
Ditto, boo! “: i'm so excited to party at tonight!”
I'm very upset that I didn't think of this.
good good thanks love <3
thank u 4 the update !!
Shelburne Museum will be reopen today. We were fortunate compared to many, many others in our state coping with effects of Irene.
Innovation without purpose is only variety. Via
You're too cheap to drive that.
never thought the zombie genre would make me cry.
If today is your delivery day, why would you call @ 10am to "add on" 4 cases? Yeah ok. I'll just have the truck go grab 4 cases for you. No.
I had the same feeling that I get when Annie calls into the KSR show??
but again when your day is ending mine is beginning!!! Sleep tight!
when the Power Plant was The Fish Market... I hits deep Baltimore Knowledge.
LOVE that you do dinner since I never get a Gypsy lunch. When is the next one?
Last day to get your name in for INCOMPLETE PASSES giveaway on #Goodreads!
#ThingsISAYDuringSchool why am I HERE!? lol
Still dreaming about the last night's dinner - a Santa Fe inspired Pork & Sweet Potato Stew on Corn Cakes.
#TDUBARIQ Give the people an update in the world of art
we wanna see #KB PERFORM AT #SummerJamz15 #retweet this to y'all followers for me please
I have so many boys at my school who say they hate Justin, but have his hair style. I'm like "lol fuck you."
Cicero~ Force overcome by force.
Ha ha ha, "here, Wego"!
About to eat at a place I haven't had in over 3 years (at least) because I just got the worst craving I've ever had.
Neuro Sonic is one of the best drinks in the world got me one cloud 15...focus and ready for the day...Good luck on the webcast .
Hook me up jazzy
Let's go
Writing my first press release...we will see how this goes! Mad props to the great writers and communicators out there!
I really wish today was over!!
Hey Kosko. Guess what beyotch! I cut my hair two days ago! GET WITH THE TIME WHORE. :P
Does your tweet count consider retweets as a tweet too? Not a quoted one, just a regular one.
Best trainer ever - thanks for pushing me to be stronger!
When I get older ima be making hella rode trips to hella states lbs
I like what Jon Huntsman is doing with his eyebrows.
I'm serious.
Almost? Way too many, they are just annoying now.
maybe you already have, but your other teacher friends just won't tell you because they don't know any better
Kev! Long time, no see, mate. When will I see you in my class again?
Recently had a "server error" and emailed ya'll. :)
Had so much fun today with my daughter!
Saints and Niners bringing it down to the wire!
what did u do
Just realized that my Thursday is scheduled from 9am to 11:50pm with only two half hour breaks of nothing. Sweet life.
“: Learn to appreciate what you have, before time makes you appreciate what you had.”
Attempt missed. Marquez (Mexico) header from the centre of the box is close, but misses to the left.
I miss you more babe
What's that I hear? RomneyBain crushed a steel company and their pension plan went belly up?? Thanks
Thanks for the heads up. I know the building. I own a condo that I rent out across the street.
Not less so, no. But deliberate obfuscation and misinformation abounds.
is your twitter name The Crazy Chicken in spanish? lol
heading out to Crozet to check out the new, improved Field School venue. Sweet!
repeating what someone blah blah blah... WHAT?!
Jay Z and Major Nutter annoucement on the Art Museum steps today in 20 mins!
yeah but i live in cali its not supposed to be under 60 :( lol
that's wonderful, glad to hear it!
ha nah she don't but it's all good me and her have daught so many times I said screw it I'm tired of this and yah
QT : this dude X just said some eggs and cereal to compare is relationship... LMAO!!(why am I missing this!
Edwin Maysonet will be our cleanup hitter in a month, won't he?
In tha nude !!
Crew owner TPG, as well as rumored interest from LVMH and Jimmy Choo, the man himself
Is tweet about roping but I'm like the only one -_- lol
i really really really really hate going to school -_-
So those aren't interdepartmental programs anymore that double list the courses as archaeology and something else?
I have a question regarding the premiere. it's really important would I ask on here or is there someone I can email?
He is so incredibly nice :)
Just wants to go driving...
I want a glamour profession
Drum roll.......and the winner of the 5 free entries to the Bedlam Mud Run is..........Selena Thomas!!!!!
I like the bartender xD tweet me :D
can you feel it yet Dave?? Crow served ice cold to the doubters..... #cardnation hopefully more To come.... This is AWESOME
just landed at LAX. Yay !
The Spa Bar Tip: Celebrate your event successes and thank all those who contributed.
Don't follow basketball but love 'just Lin Baby'. Great line.
Hahahah Like mother like daughter
I smell spring.
Working on NBIs #neara11 good ole CA has many to present! We'll see how many NBIs we end up with!
thoughts for Disney World trip: my shorts need more pockets or else my man-purse needs more Avengers buttons.
I know that but yeah & okay theen iff you sayy so :)
Thanks! RT : LOVE LOVE LOVE -- dying for a staycation!!!! It's heaven in Austin :)
I changed my number
I'm a taso a totally awesome sweet object why 1.cause I'm awesome 2.cause I'm nice 3.because I I'm a hiding ninja that stands like a lamp
if you are listening to one of my songs and you think it's about you....it is
Why didn't anyone tell me that Build-A-Bear doesn't hire people under eighteen. Teisofndhhdhdjfdjdj crap. Well time to apply for others...
Every morning when i wake up my lips always feels extra big-_-
I like Ike!
#ImAStanBecause we stuck with him through his beef with ja, Royce and pretty much everyone else
Second day of skewl!!!
HEY, I JUST MET YOU AND THIS IS CRAZY BUT HERE'S MY NUMBER SO CALL ME MAYBE
yeee i would love a DM from you<3
Loving the Keanu accent from Point Break you got goin on lol.
A teeny bit of appreciation would have been nice. But the main reason is I just don't have the time this season to do it right
How u know that?
Lock me in! CFA INC is keeping that one! I'll be here for a good min so hopefully I'll get to see you, Zell & the kids.
I would say so!
Enjoying an amazing glass of '09 cab sauv 's Purple right now! #fantastic #washingtonwine ^aef
: scholars want the same level of access and syncing that consumers enjoy on services like amazon prime, dropbox, etc.
Made it from South Philadelphia to the Garden State Parkway in exactly one Lindstrom song
Oh H--L Yes! The bride may be upset at first...but will later thank you!
Still haven't sent in your spring contribution? Send it to for a FREE issue!
Thanks! I'm happy to provide a little humor for you!
I went to like 10-12 this year. Stubhub had regular season tix for dirt cheap. Saw Heat, Thunder, Knicks, and others
I think Elvis said, 'the world is my stage and each must play our part' - did ever think Twitter would be his stage!
I wonder if Cuban is thinking of how to blame Odom for this debacle
Happy Earth Day!
WATCHING YOBITV LIVE!!!
Man I'm amazing
So #Thundercats comes back Fri. Reimagined. Watched a classic ep recently. Ouch. Does NOT hold up. Should I even bother w/ the new one?
3 Egyptians killed in recent Predator strike in North Waziristan
Can't believe how cold it is outside. Wish I could stay home
Rangers up next! RT : Congratulations to our hometown team the on advancing to the conference finals!
Paul Ryan: "we have brought this party from a squishy, hand wringing nothingness..." While endorsing Romney.
Neifi Perez because I am being completely sarcastic.
Ahaha Hee just needs to continue Correcting you . Lmfao You needa stop with that word.
lol hi hater. Jk. Well it's by Oakland. Man lol raiders do not suck. But yea where you at now?
I'm sleepy ! So imma come back to y'all in thee morninng !
Ooooohhhhhhh Yeaahhh, new menu items coming this weekend!!!!
Sonic runs early in the morning ☀
viddy better enjoy the moment, don't think it will last long
All of us can think of a book... that we hope none of our children have taken off the shelf. But if I have the right to remove t
you two are cracking me up.
Happy Birthday, !
Someone in India is spam calling my number. I hope will resolve the issue and not charge me for it.
congrats to all my wonderful friends graduating today! can't wait to see you guys change the world. love you all!
So who decided that Thursday was going to be National Do Everything Interesting Day? Spread things out a bit next time, won't you?
Love my job... Not loving that I have to shlep in today and deal with holiday travel insanity ☔
CSUnity is tomorrow! There is still time to volunteer and make a difference! GO RAMS!
Thank you for all the love!
Look great. Will it ever be deconstructed or is it to be enshrined?
need proof u actually ordered it tho
Creepy guy in the Aldis parking lot..
Who can love you like me, nobody
Biology is so boring
ahaha no worries (:
yay! I get paid on Friday. Where can I pick up the bag?
cool,at all night its skating -anna
Anybody going to Bumbershoot: Seattle's Music & Arts Festival this weekend? We'll see you there!
Venice beach
I'm in LA for the wknd & am going check out the crazy mega-local news here. KCAL has an 8pm newscast coming up. I hope there's a car chase.
Happy Mother's Day to Moms everywhere! Especially my sweet and wonderful and selfless Mom.
Moralizing and morals are two entirely different things and are always found in entirely different people. -Don Herold
Watching 90210. One of the CMB dudes said, "You must feel like when we met Bon Jovi."
I know!! Super bummed about it. But work is awesome so far!
Simply lovely!!
Anyone who knows me knows, THIS MADE MY DAY! LIFE=COMPLETE! RT I will never 'ditch the radical'-wake up idiot
i dont hang out with anyone.
chubby bunny :) lol
why isn't Ron Paul getting any air time compared to the others?
So I've always found Joe to be sexy, & enjoyed his intellect greatly... But his hot body makes me want him so badly. Damn hot, straight guys
that's whats up bro. so life's good? how's your daughter doing?
Love networking with coaches that have the same vision, beliefs, etc. as me.
it was probably mostly the cheladas
- Every Chance i Get I'm Fina Travel . .
I learned from that making the movie "Titanic" cost more than the actual ship. If only they invested in more lifeboats....
Let's
yes, the label knows. I will let the station know as well!
I've decided to become a zombie so I can get everything done. Bad news: I'm the undead. Good news: I paint while you sleep
Joan reports students confess "cheating" when they use Google to get to GPO and other reliable sources!
James and Dave Franco are attractive-ish :)
soo proud of you. x
I got to agree to that you get the chance to be with blues greats you do it.
Yeah, I was thinking about that. You're probably right. To keep the craft/artisan quality, I'll type from an old computer.
- Great article! True guide for all men...
What is Betty Cooper real name?
After last night had to drink an #energydrink before the game. Ya girl is #hype #60 more minutes
Check out Pastor Troy PERFORMING LIVE @ The Lounge in Tullahoma, TN on December 2!!!
At universal for plain white t's concert and i see someone with an shirt saying hi, i'm awkward ...<3
I LOVE #FootLoose by the way! Another hit by an amazing artist!
Ill never let you freeze without me.
ATTENTION: March 31 will be our LAST SHOW. Arlene's Grocery in NYC. 11:30pm. It's been an amazing 6 years, but it's time to say goodbye
What did the metric alien say ?Take me to your litre !
You got less than 100 followers
Culture eats strategy for breakfast!
Jared's Jokers Show Tomorrow 7:30 Doors with Girls get in FREE before 8
Just got kicked out of ihop
the Fargo show. The Atlanta show was good though! (:
You're welcome! I too am grateful because your piece knocked my socks off. And does phenomenal work. Thank you!
Americans now consume 34 teaspoons of sugar a day and now more of it's children are suffering from type 2 diabetes (was rare)
I am so fucking happy for once :)
Taking my last final today and realized I've only watched two movies this week since I was studying! Now what should I do to celebrate...
can't wait to see #thevoice! just a few more hours.
#shitguyssay What? Sorry, babe. Was watching the game. Did you say something?
RT : Thank you! :) RT : You're trophy
someone tried to break into the office over the weekend ..
You are so welcome.
Can u please follow me? (:
Hi Allison - got your inquiry but no contact info! DM or email - would love to hear more about your project.
nope - use my Canon EOS Rebel hand held....
for real! WiscoPride = no more
Not going to bed yet :) Gonna tweet a bit more
I been good man, how yu been??
Can't wait until I get my baby Rottweiler!!!!!!
#ThinkLikeAMan was hilarious!!!! #InstantClassic I wanna go see it again!!!
Hey I thought Wisconsin was open for Business? Open them Capital doors NOW!
I miss that aspect of volunteering in a library. Since I moved, I talked to the local one abt it, but OT happened at work.
finally watching the game and you are right. The arse look like teens against a bunch or bodybuilders
Hair and Makeup....
I really hate faxing stuff. It's like nails on a chalk board to me. What is this, the 1970s?
LAN is like a parking lot for DTW and the short flight is like shuttle bus.
Only 5 more followers and I hit 100! Follow me please
Each dollar was cut into eight bits worth 12
Picked up my new glasses. I can see so much better now. :D
Q: Who are you rooting for in the Sweet 16? Come get your fan gear at Cottonwood Mall today!
lol why don't you turn up tonight
all Early. Later at night when it cools down.
The day I first met you, you told me, "Never fall in love."
I guarantee it. RT ": That Men's Wearhouse guy is intimidating! Does anyone ever tell him they don't like they way they look?"
Started writing a short play, put in work at Workshop Theater Co, wtnt over lines and even washed dishes. Watch out people!
I dont keep some1 on the side jus to protect my feelings or to be on the safe side:I like showing ppl I can be loyal w/o a ring or title
patiently contemplating
oh, hopefully the tweet noise doesn't bring in stray cats !!!!!!!! Hehe
I dont believe anything I see on the interwebz. Its all about real life. I'm not talking about assets either, I mean the type of peson you r
I took into account that they don't leave Clay that often. I don't count anything destroyed in the house.
Don't forget tomorrow night! I will be Signing Silent Night Zombie Night DVD's at Dark Del in Burbank. :) See you there at 7:00pm
HAPPY MOTHER'S DAY to all mothers, grandmothers and those who nurture and care for others.
I miss you guys so much </3
It is May!!! Getting Married this month!!!!!!! Finally!!!!
that's a great one!! Thanks!
I start with the premise that the function of leadership is to produce more leaders, not more followers. - Ralph Nader
#17 has to be retired first RT : Retire
I was hesitant. I feared the rooster might bite me. Lol.
If you plan to phone the #IRS this week, wait a few days. The #IRS reports the Tuesday after President's Day is its busiest day of the year.
Had about enough for 1 day!
haha! It's more fun to see complaints about people who expect technology to be magic.
I've been injected with so much tree/grass/weed pollen this year that I expect my mutant plant powers to manifest ANY DAY NOW.
The start-up pitch I vote for at #ultralight is Up-and-coming start up!
My initial msg was a thought about the state of other teams in the league. Not a dig on any team in particular.
Who is going to be there at the end Monday!!!
alright your pre-dialed
Chillaxin' and getting in the groove to start another short work week. Hurray!
The Salty Caramels will be performing today at 11am for TEDX Columbus at COSI! We are so excited to be a part of this unique event!
thank you for following us!! Check out our music when you get a chance :) <3 Shaun
which water store?
I cant open up my heart without a care.
We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit. -Aristotle Better get to practice!!!!!
REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT AND FIRST LADY AT A CAMPAIGN EVENT
please visit the Tadich Grill on California Street for me!
"Behind every successful child is an adult who believed in him."
"Unlimited Monthly" is now called PREMIUM. Thanks for pointing this out.
Every company has a variety of costs, although there are four types that come up the most: fixed, variable, mixed and step costs.
I am loving leaflet.js. Made a map, dropped on a site and my CSS auto applied the look to the map popups. Now to connect to WMS and done!
check this out!
Once you try for so long, and keep giving someone another chance, you just want to give up.
Wow :-D MT ...3rd great prayer, after Help, and Thanks, is Wow!
We'll be at tonight from 6-8pm with Pinkberry samples! Stop by and see us for a swirly treat and learn more about our catering!!
Nigga I worked for everything I got
Today in summary: absolutely terrifying!!!
Happy Birthday, Bridget!
SADE WAS RESPLENDENT she is a living & breathing evidence that less is more . . . I just keep hitting the replay button on my memory : )
RT : I think I'm fine with protesters swarming K St, as long as they don't #OccupyPotbellys. Leave that to me, protesters.
yes yes we did!
remembering concerts: saw Big Audio Dynamite, Joe Strummer, but never got to see The Clash. saw John Lydon, but never PIL, The Sex Pistols
Spent most of the day planning an addition to the house, which may or may not ever be built. Now back to printing out old scores.
Long Long lines at the Turkey Bowl- Awesome day for High School Football!!
LOL SHABAZZ picks UCLA because of how bad they were!! AWESOME. LOL
When girls wear short shorts or skirts with Ugg boots
RIP DONNA SUMMER!
Come in for a free drink today!!
all good points. sort of see the piece as an interesting attempt to add context -- tho execution def debatable.
it's breezy, but warm!! How's the free trip!!
wonderful look foward to meeting you both! hope we surpass expectations!!!
#GOP says,"Im a good guy": ,explain 2 Amers how ur supportng a BUDGET that Cath Bishops condmn as "IMMORAL" is good!
I'm genuinely sad that Angry Boys is over.
haha oh man...so amazing. Still wish I could've tried that last roast
and I ain't even got started yet.
Alarm is set to go off in 7 hours! Looking forward to the keynote talk on Data Narratives tomorrow
Haven't watched #TheArtist yet. Maybe i should 2c if I fall asleep! lol
Is anyone tweeting about classic car shows in OR/WA/BC?
I finally tore down all of the matching, mass-produced, floral/sequined bullshit in my sister's old room. HELLO, ART, CONTRAST, CHARACTER.
Finally can go to bed
Yo mamma is so fat that when she went sky diving,she covered the sun.
yeah good, where you from?
The Fleetwood Mac clue did it for me.
All this dam change
Checking now....I will get back to you shortly :)
so sorry to have missed you! Gosh darned vacation...
co-op show went well. some interesting talent here at Purchase.
Please follow
Congrats to the 2012 TN Int'l queens:Mrs. TN Int'l - Traci Pangonas, Miss TN Int'l - Chelsea Chandler & Miss Teen TN Int'l - Hannah Housman!
I'll be there sometime this summer! No worries :):)
The only girl in the bar swagginn
Elmer loves ass as well as I.. Lol
Office had me in tears. I'm such a sap
BBJ Parent Company CEO Ray Shaw passed away yesterday. He was a visionary with a heart of gold..I will miss him.
when did u join?
yeaah. He does.
i will be in nyc next week for #blogfest2012. Dinner Tuesday night?
I remember the day and followed me. LOL! that's never happened:(
dude clueless
how much fun Great talent, great voices & great host! Luv being hear for the show!
Ha. No worries. I skipped out on a friend's paper to see Destroyer at ASECS in Vancouver, so I know how it is. :)
Just returned from Sarasota FL where I spoke at two community programs. Both were excellent. Am leaving for Rodeph Shalom in NYC to speak.
The Social Media Intern will manage our Twitter account and Facebook Page and to a lesser extent, monitor Foursquare and Yelp. Its unpaid.
who is they
You can convert your own media (you could also sew your own clothes or change your own oil) but do you have the time?
If you love fashion make sure to stay tuned for live tweet updates from the shoot!
A belated Columbus Day #improvisation 14 minutes 92 seconds with generous rests for reflection on discovery and greed.
So fucking mad. I seriously can't anymore. I'm so done with school:( i'm just so tired of everything!
Is it Villa de Flores? thats what I see on google maps.
Grateful for new fab follows
“: sorry the guy doesn't look as good as you do in a low low V-neck... -_-” #Truth!
fdmf is on the move sellers are out and the buys are rolling in...!
One of the most Amazing & Special Experiences...Watched live taping tonight...All-Star Cast & Guest Stars...
Heck a saturday weekend wise. Made a little trip to Fort Ben and then Triton. Maybe a bonfire tonight. Horrible city living.
What is that?
loving life to da fullest rite now just drop another one in studio ...875 studio on southside
Even better! 20 minutes at your desk should sort you?
Love that movie! Never watch movies too often, never more than once. I've seen it 5 times! Excited for the Bucks tomorrow!
I miss my grandma. I wish she lived closer to me. 😔
RIGHT!? SO GOOD Did you see the MV yet?
#Codemma all the way :D
Thanks! Good to be back on the scene :)
I wouldnt be a creeper if you checked your phone -_-
When is the last time you saw Mayweather bleed?
what the fuck you mean by that? lol
Throat hurts! Good day though. Had an awesome time helping with the blood drive! Proud of FFA. Maybe next time I'll donate? :)
Can you invoice one and not the other? Wouldn't that be like a donation unless you let it slide all around?
workin hard for the music, in the throws of finishing album details
Sleep? Or watch the luminous Ralph’s/CVS sign spin on its axis? Ralph’s. CVS. Ralph’s. CVS. Ralph’s. CVS. Ralph’s…
The Chicken Alfredo sounds awesome... and Smores for dessert? Can't beat that
I see erbody talkin bout Netflix got new movies, time to fire up the
There is a difference between jeans and trousers.
Phone bout to die n I have no charger
Thank you : )
thanks! I'm actually in LA, but is making us proud at #TNW2012 :)
Don't have my charger and my phones at 10%
Party Bus just came available for this Friday night. Don't miss out on drastically cut pricing for this last bus available. 405-447-2446
It was great seeing you! You're one of my favorite people yet we rarely meet up. How about lunch on Wednesday 3/14?
Making yummy stuff for ;) her birthday is tomorrow
If youre having a bad day, just slip into your favorite leather dress and go out. Instant, temporary cure. Lol.
Any luck on getting that Carcuzzi made?
When you have nothing to say, say nothing. -John Mason
I wanna kno wat she wants but then I really don't lol oops mom dukes crzy.
My softball team offically sucks well except for me
Hey can I get a computer here at the WB that would let me watch the #MMGPressConference And can you bring back junior seau?
this is the least interesting Apple news conference ever
high as hell off exotic fruit
Lol now people will argue what was more important #AmyWineHouse 's death or the Norway massacre.
It's not the same, but get all up in Wild Flag!
Awe thank you love. You are much to kind. :)
Welcome to our sexroom Trey have ur way 😍😘😉
Wanna get the gears community active give them free stuff
Back in the lab. Take out just arrived! Yumm
Looking for local Oklahoma City artists of all kinds to submit artwork and photoshoots inspired by music.
From triple OT to the ninth inning of a no-hitter. Great night for sports fans!
Sign of a good conference is meeting a fellow Twitter fiend that you have never met in real life.
I did the rural area above Portage(Moundville) for the recall signatures, very different, but fun for me...
Wake up to bullshit let me hurry up and get my shit out this house!
JUST LOVE IT! CAST AMAZING and REALLY love the direction!!!
#Troilus and Cressida is going up on January 13th, running for 6 weeks, until February 19th.
Robert K. Oermann • 8/3/11 Music Row Magazine Review Trust me, you have GOT to listen to “No Beer Here” by Amy Ames. It is a complete hoot.
Negotiating w/terrorists doesn't bother me provided DON'T GIVE IN to their DEMANDS & give everything they WANT! Get NOWHERE if don't talk.
every artist needs a muse...waiting to be inspired takes too long...time to go out in the world and find it! never did like sittg on my arse
well don't feel too bad fellow twitter person hah I'll be back next season! :D
You're the apple to my pie, You're the straw to my berry..The smoke to my high, and you're the one i wanna marry. <3
just saying hi 😊😘
HELLO I AM TWEETING YOU ON GRADUATION DAY
I'm following back today. If I missed you, and you're not a spammer, let me know
I knew I wasn't the only one lol!!! RT : I eat fries n ice cream too!!
yo its Robby, thanks for your help today. Well be back out on University at 8!
Lol getting ignored for being "over protective" is so fun </3
lol I'm guilty but that is for family and groups of ppl. Stick with a cutting board!
i kno. but you do too. and i forgot to call you back
Hey Danielle! If you are digging the new band album, you would like and
my bad bro! Take my account of til tomorrow(: lol
I've been sleeping on stones.
Hello winter cold. I don't remember inviting u.
I forgot how much I love bandanas.
“I do not regret one professional enemy I have made. Any actor who doesn't dare to make an enemy should get out of the business.”Betty Davis
varsity my favorite style
Read this today...Apples are more effecient than caffeine for waking you up in the morning....Le Peep Guests disagree!
Science is a lot like sex. Sometimes something useful comes of it, but that's not the reason we're doing it.
Real estate auction.. It's to early!
School , & cheer tomorrow (:
Sex appeal is 50% what you've got and 50% what people think you've got.
My family is out at Easter dinner. I'm sitting in a parking lot because yesterday the kicked me out. I don't hate them.
Some dreams, stay with you forever.
Im here for the memories ill never forget.
#50YB Flacco has a fairy tramp stamp
“: FRIEND: Will visit you in jail. BEST FRIEND: *Blows up the wall.* "Get in the van NOW!"” (;
Thinking I should be more excited for vacation but this is going to be a trip... And it's coming up so fast...
Was that Sheila E.? And why is she drumming from the balcony?
I sware, if we get another crappy weekend of weather I'm going to go flipppin crazy on someone.
i miss you to <3 what have you been up to lately? when are you visiting the bay?
The best and most efficient product available for flood control. Sandless Sandbags. 10 year storage life.Never build another sandbag again
sarcasm right? hahah
yup yup but I don't know what to do tomorrow. S&I maybe Willis maybe. Maybe just go to the lodge and get facey with my niece
srry it seems like i tweet u kinda randomly and u dont even kno me lol so im really srry bout tht!! :/ kay well bye
You also need to check whether weapons actually carry the attributes described, etc
This is going to be one hell of a summer.
I just ordered Jeff Casteel: How to Run the 3-3 Odd Stack Defense (DVD) from Amazon.com #arizonawildcats Go Cats . I smell Roses
Yeah but it was a little different...
Great interview, you and Egyptian protesters are in our thoughts!
happy birthday bro!
I love this stuff . . . Can't wait.
Its almost 10pm, time for Common Law. Suddenly my day doesn't seem so bad. Those eyes could melt the coldest of moods, even mine ;)
anything like you in SF? great idea! cc
Woodson needs to coach this like an elimination game. Have Melo and Stat on the floor. Don't leave bullets in your gun.
wait what happen??
please follow me I LOVE It Will Rain!!!!
Fairness is relative to an individual. There can be no fairness as long as one group of people get to cram their version down our throats
Whoever programs MTV's shows needs to be fired. They're always running behind on time. My DVR misses the last 2 min of the shows I record.
cool! Do they go up to your knee?
Scales don't tip the moment you overeat. Weight gain & lose is a slow process. 3,500 extra cals = 1lb weight gain so keep checks & balances!
ik lol i dont want to go back to school
“: I don't think I could even possibly imagine Justin dying.” omg dont even talk like that. its too painful to even imagine.
DJ'n at Silverado bar til close.
Want to be a reviewer? Let us know...RT : audience reviewers - knowledgable to newcomers, what do you think?
Ripple effect: Will clothing manufacturers make bigger pockets to accomodate tablets?
He's so nice! So sweet of him to come pick up a cheesecake for you! Had you tried those flavors before? HAPPY Belated Birthday!
it says MAHOMIES!!:)
I casually mentioned that I didn't think I should do a talk about MPLP at ABA this summer, coworker was surprised & asked me why.
#follow back
Best wishes to all the nominees tonite Well deserved!
Gatorbait lemonade cherry pie dynamite sticks its Wednesday!
Cant wait till sunday lol goin to mi grandmoms
Black Friday shopping like a boss
You just gotta let go sometimes.
Yooo im bout to die of starvation papi store close manee
what a great day!!!! good surprises on the way how about you?
nothing you?
eds trip in the near future is needed... derek says he will provide
#nowplaying "Zellmar's Delight", Sonny Clark
The more you praise and celebrate your life, the more there is in life to celebrate. ~Oprah Winfrey
Sometimes I wake up in my bed & I don't know where I've been.
Brats Brats Brats
Your Welcome!
Today: 15+ scholars presenting their scholarly multimedia developed using Scalar and HyperCities
Hoping you have a great Valentines Day.
HEY. I'm always a cool kid.
Just finished 10 hour Dj set @ English! Driving home I could still see waveforms & started picking the next song to come out of radio songs
Just saw a dude I went to high school with on "Portlandia." Spokane would be ashamed of you,
would some "Biden apologizing" meme tumblrs cheer you up?
Griffith Stadium is a great story--included it in my book. I'd like to hear story of Mary Church Terrell
boobson got that swine flu
do you think there will be more developers following suit? I'm sure they're not the first.
Rip Joe Pa
Marty B. on Reds radio u people who were critical of the Reds 4 bringing UK tonight should be ashamed of yourselves
Okay....ready to go home now...we've been at the mall for 6 hrs
Hm...Alex Smith wants a new agent, and Niners sign Manningham. Maybe Manning next?
black outs!!!!
Digital sign at Shiloh Missionary Baptist Church tells marchers to keep the dream alive, and that it's 72 degrees out.
Thank you Lord for moving today in mighty ways!
Hey Vegas! What's the best staycation in town?
Aw, didn't *bring* any cookies this week. But if he had...he'd need to guard 'em. :)
I don't think it's the beginning of the end in actuality, more of an SOE issue, they've been having some issues
Red Wing will make its third appearance at state. The Wingers' took third place at the 2009 tourney.
this is the second time in two days a website has made me fill out additional info to sign up when using FB connect to register, WTF?
they DO have a Boat...well, i stand by my damn..LOL! thats nice!
oh no! haha! hows manila treating u? again.
Dem boyz got.dat tequilla n loud on deck
GREAT DISCOUNTS THIS WEEK ! FREE LAYAWAY! STOP BY SAT OR SUN CHANCE TO WIN BIG !!BUCKS $$OPEN SAT 8-8PM (SUN BY APPOINTMENT*)HAPPY HOLIDAYS!
Pit bull attack happened early this a-m as victim was picking up her newspaper. Dogs broke through hole in fence.
just letting you know you are one of the reasons I ride motorcycles
(and Tebow's) jocks! Stop trying to minimize Lebron's impact to the game. We all witnessed it. *how soon they forget*...
it wasn't open when we went is it open now
If it sounds like writing, I write it. -Elmore Leonard
Ugh. Double ugh.
Happy Groundhog day from your friends at Byrd Tile. Only 6 more weeks of Winter. Has it even really felt like Winter this year to you?
THANKS SO MUCH FOR FOLLOWING ME.. I FOLLOWED BACK!!
go #ChicagoBears! Will be at the game today! :)
Your music is lovely! :-)
LOVE It :D RT When anyone tells me I can't do anything, I'm just not listening any more.- Florence Griffith Joyner
Good morning....Friday the 13th, watch your back!!!
DUDE YES 
Chin up! <3
Makeup is like art, you just have to go with the flow.
My life philosophy is simple: I need someone to love, something to wait and do something.
dang why am i so overly emotional
I don't know the key to success, but the key to failure is trying to please everybody. -Bill Cosby
great dinner last night in NYC with the one and only, TPE pro, aka Halowax
Im Laying Down Now
What a gr8 game...so exciting!
THNX! Almost at 1,500 followers! Keep going & WIN a FLIP HD Camcorder!
i want to go back to europe :(
Rick Lee and the Night Owls tonight at 9 PM Music, 10 dollar buckets of Lone Star and great Hoy Dogs! Come see us tonight.
RT for good morning mentions
10-game trip, win first four and then lose the next six: immaturity.
Merry Christmas!!!!
The dream of the 1890s is alive in Austin.
RT : Israeli Supreme Court rejects gov't request to delay; requires demolition of Ulpana in Beit El settlement by July 1:...
I HAVE TO STAY ON MY SHIT SO I NEVER LOOK LIKE YOU NIGGAS
I should be doing homework..but instead I'm listening to Pandora..o well
funny, i'm that way when i go vlc or zc. definitely not a happy camper. probably from the bad sleep.
Cars Sale Exercise workout lose weight black friday thanksgiving followback
- Amazing Coach Dale Brown! Ask him about Tops In Louisiana!
thank you very much. There is many locations to photograph around Austin. Many nice subjects.
- you are doing an amazing job of staying away from social media...
thats dope bro
RT : oh no no my friend, the high seas it is for him..and probably train.
Show up for indy media, Albuquerque: 3pm TODAY, City Hall, support Quote-Unquote & their request to review the city's public cable RFP.
where is mike Cameron
In traffic...bumpn jay-z reasonable doubt.....feeln it...
thats so cool.I'm jealous,I love linkin park c:
My pick for #MLB #BeatTheStreak is #cano and #jeter im keeping it loCal with my #Yankees I have a 2 game hitting streak who do u have?
You won't always understand what other people do, but know that change can happen when it begins within you.
Thanks! #FF Ladies Edition! , all sparkly, beautiful, fun ladies & actresses! <3
thanks girl
Calling it quits. Now back to "My Jesus".
That's cool! Love the shaving cream effect.
apple will reveal the iPhone 5
u look great! Good job! :)
what's up
with your
havent been up here in a while wassup!
LAST REMINDER: HEAR meeting 2nite @ Slingers in Livonia. 7:30 pm.. pizza will be served
yay!!! Time is flying!
Look. If Acta kept Pestano in and he gave up the bomb you would said to put in Hagadone...
thanks for the follow! What do you plan to do after graduation?
Thanks...I'm trying to get back into the grove. :-) Want to help make job seeking less painful!
Agreed! I plan to be gone for most of it.
one day it will happen... Mark my words haha
Another brand built to perfection by Joseph & Vanderpool...
I saved you some
nah just ppl fuckin me over again
Kombucha fixes everything.
anyword or news on Lloyd?
Happy #4th of July weekend everyone! Hope everyone has a safe and fun holiday!
In the words of
School really suck
Every morning there's a halo hanging from the corner of my girlfriend's four-post bed.
I got the moves like jagger
That's officially a new word btw, platformize
Polka dot boobies... :D
isn't that how you got the gig in the first place?! ~PK
the world is ending tomorrow... hahahahaha
#EveryManShouldKnowHowTo keep his queen happy & satisfied while keepin all other women at bay, unhappy, & unsatisfied bc they cant have him!
shelby and kenzie
Off to the Harn for Anthony Shelton's 6pm talk on Rehumanizing Babel: Museums and the Re-enchantment of the Arts and Sciences
#British ": I'm not a 'Football' expert, but this game seems bloody exciting suddenly? #Superbowl"
signature for what?
Cutters and Grays combine for 5 homers as Cutters win MABL Championships in Game 5. Score 10-5. Now it's winter.
Hey Coach Dinan!!! See you in Indy!
Have a nice mothers day weekend. ( #mothers #mothersday)
The #Cubs lost but all is not lost, The Goonies is on G4! HEY YOU GUUUUUYSSSS!!!!
RT : Unity housed 452 people living outdoors in less than a year, amazing! #naeh11 #HomewardVA #UnityGNO what can #RVA do?
Don't know what to do? You enjoy your free subs is what you do! Their mistake, not yours.
No problem! I know how tough it is to find a good haircut in this world.
THE SCREENING ROOM: Happy 70th Birthday, Gorgeous! Here&#39;s to Barbra Streisand (Video)
SNHU public safety are miserable people
most likey take my licence for a while.
I really should go to sleep... 7 am meeting tomorrow...
Should have been doing homework. Caught up on The Pacific. Wow.Will have to read deep into the nite...but Wow.
I am looking for an excuse to skip yoga today. Suggestions welcome.
A Preakness hat-preview party held a week before the race. Good idea? Bad idea?
Body pillows can be used while sleeping to help keep mom comfortable.
There is no cosmetic for beauty like happiness
On the bus going to the SIA Snow show expo on-snow demo day@ winter park
GOP shuts down first amendment rights (no signs in galleries) but allows guns in the Capitol.
guys, you're weird lolol i'm the most normal mahone body part ever. seriously :P hahahaha
I wear glasses, too, and 3D movies give me headaches. Hopefully, you'll fare better than me.
Brewing tea, smelling the aroma, & the tasting of the fragrance & smoothness of Pu-er tea is likely to relieve stress & calm the nerves.
I hear that Belichick might need to talk Draft and even #Bruins playoffs tonight on hm
(: Then You'll Get A Perfect Gift Who's Your Favorite MB Member
Yum! Lemon Ice is my favorite summer treat!
"My mustache makes me look like a child molester; therefore, I should be charged with child molestation." -
thinkin of a master plan
is live tweeting timeline to Titanic. 30 mins or so till it marks the sinking time.
The dreary gray weather today was a bummer. Only October and I'm already tired of it. Think I'll move to San Diego before it gets cold!
Still can't decide if it's better for a team to win their conference tournament or fall earlier. Rest vs momentum.
has some really cool music, some of witch made me cry, y'all check him out, really #Music #Shoutout :-D
Got a pizza and 2 beers earlier for about $30. Now I think I could have 2 movies or CDs for the same fucking price.
Great chatting with you as well! I will be in touch (hopefully by later today or Monday)
: In sports terminology it is called getting "chippy."
So I got a job. I know. Just like that.
I'm about to drift off into a food coma
J of Communication calls for submission for spec. issue "Social media and political change," deadline Aug 15
sneak me up with you
great win!!
I want to get a golf clicker for how many times I say "digital archives" today. It had to be at least 100 yesterday
Happy to do it! RT : thanks so much for your (double) keynote addresses!
i love a gurl with confidence
low top 11s
#AlisonBechdel's new book is stunningly beautiful, heartbreakingly poetic, and elegantly psychoanalytic.
no problem and i just sent it <3
could you email the lyrics??? I would love to see what you have!!!
Question. On Bears website you can't get a Sanzenbacher Jersey. A mistake? Or what they think of him?
Today is a brand new day. Forget what happened yesterday and don't waste today.
If I miss it somehow, please be sure to let me know when it's gone online!
belated thanks Stephen! Hope you're enjoying the weeken
Glad to have such #smart #PR colleagues.
Heading to the OM for an job fair. Come visit in the teen lounge!
Happy Birthday ! I remember celebrating at Lake Atitlan, Guatemala
The person who gets the farthest is generally one who is willing to do and dare.The sure-thing boat never gets far from shore.~Dale...
tks for the RT, love your location, seat 1 on the plane. :-)
You are going to knock 'em dead!!! We'll be cheering for you girly! #TeamSammy!
would any feel so inclined to write my research paper for mee
$10 all you can drink and the best photography NYC has to offer! HTTP://VANDERBILTREPUBLIC.COM/
Really appreciate the cool shout out. Thanks!
I can do it
we rep Ohio EVERYDAY! #DeezyNation is back!
There will be no working in the weeping willow office today. When I got back from grocery shopping, I was a drowned rat....
I think you meant to say Rick Santorum.
Modeling is a career not an attitude, so being rude and snobbish is not apart of the job. Some of these chicks need a major
Patti Labelle brought it big. Awesome approach to the SSB at the #winterclassic #NHL WOW!
#ThingsThatINeed.... For to shout out and RT.
An epitaph, "I live by the nanosecond and burn the candle at both ends; with a blowtorch." - Michael Hart, cofounder of Project Gutenberg
Just got some sick shots at the Guthrie Theater!!
The minute you settle for less than you deserve, you get even less than you settled for. -Maureen Dowd
#1514 haha you're just one of the best ;) talked with you a few times :P x Amy #MahomiesHelpMahomies Guys you should follow her! <3
when facing a system that doesn’t lend itself to your needs you must devise ways to change that system. Ella Baker
At for the tomato talk. It's packed!
Hate finding out I've reached the end of my chapstick
miss u kills ♡
We have openings for child care this fall in Aurora, Illinois! New state of the art center! Contact: for more info!
HINT: STREAKERS, Keep you schedule open for tonight!!! 4 CMT TIX on the line so pick your partner wisely
I swear my uncle Dennis is the FUNNIEST dude in the world..love dat dude to death!
today's gratitude is for the fresh papaya that our next door neighbor gave us from his tree. yum! #thankfulfor fruit-sharing neighbors!
anything that teaches awareness to black cars is good awareness.
Heading to Evansville early in the morning for film audition- then on to KY to meet some of my girlfriends family- oh boy!
Imagine flying in from Australia to see Phantom Menace.
open arms reject assuming hands.
Am I wrong to think that even if your interviewing for a babysitting position you should still look nice? I don't think so.....
My hair is orange :'(
There are no strong drinks, just weak men.
I'm only with U because of the baby and its not my baby. UUUUUUUHGGGGGHHHHH
I really want to go to the brad paisley concert 😔
Pats and Packers are goin' down this weekend!
Come get 15¢ Miller Drafts while you watch Afroman perform another great show
": thanks soldier n same to you.
Mom: What shoes are u bringing to Italy? Me: Sneakers? Mom: Are u telling me you aren't going to wear gladiator sandals in the Colosseum?
Go Gators!!!
No catch just come and relax
It's 4am and all I want is a shamrock shake.
someone take notes! wish I could be in both!
The Understory hit some Goggle Searches today, here are a few links
I'm in foul mood because the possum I ordered last night was totally botched and insolent delivery boy said it was last one.
I think most of the group preferred the tarantulas. Myself () liked both equally!
My whole time line is filled with Jason is Flawless....but I'm not complaining because it's so TRUE!😍
I own an Web Hosting company. I can work from anywhere. And you? Are you a stay at home dad too?
the 5 panel doe...
Stupid sub - "Im going to give u directions orally" me- "Hopefully not anally!"
lol, not sure you need too much help -- off to a great start. You are very welcome, btw, & thank you's right back! :)
Lifeguarding and doing prom hair and makeup next weekend! Now I have a new job as a pre-algebra tutor! $$$$$$
dear Mad, i love your account!! tweet me more.(:
Sound check and then time to get glam for the show! ;)
Skyrim has this horrible habit of making me forget that life exists.
haha, that's good to hear, i'm still fine.. Lol.
No, Alex I can't hear anything. When he closed off the chatrm..SOunds like he's back...or trying
Happy Valentines Day! Keep Love in your heart!!!
Pats are going to give the Jets a Dirty Sanchez
✰ #OnlineBusiness Tip: Create a series of ongoing videos or stories, so users will be hooked and want to learn more!
what's up mate! You should've been at SXSW drinking lagers and strongbows with the UK bands! U back in town?
Would make my life a lot simplier.
Ouch RT : Royal Street in New Orleans. Walking past a fortune teller with a black eye. Honey, you woulda seen it coming.
haha you know I would!
then my dude reach out to her. What stopping u?
WAKE UP FOOL!!
Dear please come back to Chicago! My dad didnt take me to the concert even though i already bought my tickets! </33
Why am I awake 😱
Tip 6: Ending the Date - If there is a mutual attraction don't forget to get her number and don't expect a kiss on the first date.
Sorry folks! Our webhook processor fell behind a bit. It'll be back to real time shortly.
#weirdidea post a photo of your world today! I want to see what your world view looks like
Thanksgiving is coming up next week! We want to know: what are you thankful for this year?
right now anyone can sign up and awareness is key! There's a mtg tmrw night from 630-830 Join us!
Council verdict today on Sugarloaf Wharf extension
okay Rudolph :* “: I have the meanest pimple on my nose”
RT : Dinner party for full-on debauchery! RSVP for dinner ASAP. See u 2nite
Field trip all day with my bros Follow them
drawings are held during the Sugar Bowl
Thank you. I am looking forward to it as a pedagogical experiment, which is a bit sick in itself I suppose. :)
Agreed! Thanks for the comment :).
Looks like no D for me... Thanks Knicks hahaha
Gives hour long intro to rewrite of Pound's In the Station of the Metro.
Tomorrow night: Install my solo show at Tryst (opening Thurs) This Sat: Art bazaar and gallery opening. Today: freelancing at The Current
So unfocused today. May need to take a nap and start this day over.
RT If you are a #ProudMahomie :)
what show are you at?!?!
is my causing with you
What's the last song you listened to?
Have a great day everyone, and take time to enjoy life today.
love how always reminds the final three that they want to see their name written down this time...in case they forget!
I did. On the BBC. MT : My pilot #Mistresses was picked up by ABC for 13 episodes!!!! I'm so excited for you to see it.
You Should Follow Me ;)
I think Friday would work best! Aw, I can't wait to see you!! (:
Watching Football!
well the fluff-slinging at least pays the rent -- it's tough selling talents and abilities that you lack -- esp in a down market :)
Yoy may also purchase any furnishings in any of the finely appointed & decorated designer rooms! There are 40 of them! GlynAllyn is must see
I'm following u as well thanks
Tonite this guy asked me if I was married. I said, "No, why?" He said I was wearing a ring on my left hand. But it is on my middle finger!
but you dont eat the bacon so it goes to waste and gets thrown away, goes to a landfill and grass doesn't grow at landfills
naybe we can meet.
NOT 1 YOUNG AMERICAN VOICE IN THE ROOM @
The trouble with learning from experience is that you never graduate. - Doug Larson
Y u no Skype me bitch
MY DADDY CAN GET A LIMO TOO HEHEHE AND YES IM MARRYING NO MATTER WHAT ANYONE SAYS!
Gabbert out playing Shaub for f**k sake!!!!! KILLING my fantasy... #GoPackGo !!!!
make a status update about being alone and get zero comments
nahh I'm to tired for all of that
RT Live tweeting David Stewart/Jane Ashby talking about an "AMP"d #deved math program.
Was holding a yearbook and it has sharp corners so it cut my head, and it hurts super bad! :/
the page of the band yes , christina and lisa :)
you're no fun :p haha
I wanna see these new jerseys tho..
RT : The right corporate culture can inspire intense passion for the product (think Apple) says at
Well off to work...you have a good morning. Thanks for RT.
you should also thank all the undercovers who listened on the low but won't RT
I need to buy myself a sombrero for tonight !
lol, I'll be 78 when I look like Stallings and you'll look like Grady from Sanford and sons!
That's a gizmo at Gitmo.
i wish i looked like a friendly person. My face always looks like im pissed the fuck off and im gonna brutally kill people once im spoken to
": They will grow up and eat you #conversationkiller " really ? I fucking love her (:
Ill get back to my fans soon! Get me some more followers. Im slacking!
It's nice to be back on twitter again
Cowboys looked pretty good tonight.
another Friday in Georgetown: Rebecca Black on repeat and my boyfriends Haagen and Dazs
just got tn test data back for memphis city schools 56 pcnt of teachers' students are making less progress on tests. Failure?
Great, that makes ME look bad now because everyone around me is a fucking jackass.
You joining us tonight? I really want guac. Right now.
Done. Good luck to her.
The Bside on the vinyl single was Mr. Brownstone. I was shocked + amazed that they could say FUCKER in the song
can you send me your amazing bean salad recipe you made last week?
lovely meeting you at MW! just shared your podcasts with me...love what im hearing :) thanks for sharing!
great memories 4 me in the 90s, but not winning RT : had amazing thought: Metrodome will cease to exist in < 3 yrs
It is way to early to have class
we love you!
Just realized that comes between Nico and Night Ranger in my iPod. That's about right.
Peace from Pittsburgh, hope all is well
Why is it so hard to forget what people have done wrong to you.? :/
Short girls that drive big trucks SUVs etc... So sexy
This is a historic day. The last flight of the Space Shuttle Discovery.
thanks love
not without plaid pants. Ha ha
when are the shows, maybe I can make it up for one!
Well, maybe that's a bit unfair. People seem much more enamored of the military thing.
Ha, not making the trip Hope all is well cc
HEY PEEPS!
Yall Use Twitter To Holla At Bit*hes, I Use Twitter For Strictly Business.
Brady, Rodgers, Brees, Manning, Manning and Big Ben for sure ahead of Romo.
LOL! LOL! and with no shoes to boot!
Got any Journey?
They could just wait & play Nunez more often, rotating DHs until they unload pitcher/salary. Even can wait until during season
Wat time do I have to be at the school for the concert ?
should I start watching game I thrones??? Is it on netflix
#ACMs your incredible and my idol Taylor! Congrats and aloha from Hawaii! :)
#TwilightQuiz @ 6:30 It's Gonna Be Fun, I Just Picked A Prize....The Twilight Books White Edition..For Some Reason I Got 2 when I Order 1
working at castleton square mall >>> anywhere else
i guess Valentine was right last week when he wasn't too optimistic about the season
Body Work by experienced Certified Massage Therapist, Healer at Los Angeles Area.
You're welcome!
What's the best part of being deaf? You can't hear women scream when you rape them.
lol I told y'all to wait Smh
OMG JINX
Follow me xd ! ♥
Received Logic in the mail... Yes... I paid... Ready for a new start composing music.
nice nice were at??? Mom's bday is the 28th too, so she's getting a pandora bracelet and a pair of frees ☺
Working on some tracks epic and def jam wants to meet me soon as my songs are completed can't wait to get these songs rolling .
so, what you do if i cried ?
Thank you for putting together an amazing convention! Love the entire staff of Jump. xoxoxo
UGH.. No wonder ur sub par. Ozzie, please send this guy down since he thinks there is something up above.
you almost made me get one too!!
ok : )thank
Hi everyone! Just stopping by to share something that i learned from a kiddy book today, "Be yourself, it's ok!" I luv it!!!
just watched your wordcamp video. Loved it! Have u tried the WP Deploy plugin yet?
Happy Memorial Day weekend! What are you doing to celebrate?
that's baller status.
": Breaking: Water wet. ;) RT: San francisco is a very strange place." And its weirdness is wonderful.
Thanks so much for spreading the word! :)
Haha, what do you mean? What is the tweet referencing?
If I didn't accept your Facebook friend request, don't expect me to accept you on any other social network.
Juan Rivera with a 2 run home run in the top of the 3rd. Giving the #Dodgers a 3-0 lead over the
Thanks for a great event! Really great bunch of folks you bring together!
no more clay county coffee stout :(
It's beautiful outside!!
We will lobby our federal officials and attempt to get the to get involved as well. Our students need it.
RT : I'm bored, someone text me.
RT This is for you See you tonight! RT Remember to celebrate Arbor Day today by acting real shady.
New audition just in!
sorry we didn't get a chance to hang more. Hopefully VMWorld?
they sold out in like 5 minutes Isabella. The whole tour sold out in like 5 minutes.
we would definitely win.
Today a lady said to me "I want to be you when I grow up!". First thought bitch please! Then I took a self inventory of Tavey Sosa
Go TS! : Good luck! : About to take DSST test in Personal Finance.
People who question another's beauty, have a problem in seeing their own
I laughed over here, too.
One thing I will not miss about Georgetown is the sound of jet engines.
Thursday. day. thank. goodness.
Chiming in w #iaspm tweeters on excellence of Karl Millers's paper. Project critiques historical narrative that C20 listening is passive.
Heyy Brandon :)!! <3 love you , hope your doing well just wanted to let you know that I'm praying for you! Love you Brandon .
"that which we do not love about ourselves shall regress and take its revenge."
I also learned to type on a typewriter I don't think anyone will know what that is in a few years lol
New Packer fan is born Griffin Matthew Shafer!! Pics to come!!
We will be at Twiztid and Kottonmouth Kings at Emerald Theatre tonite. We will have some cool gifts for HEAR fans..look for us!!
I may have put too much cheese on my chili. SIKE! Not possible.
so do you sing or what?
Hmm Great day at the pool today:) Fantastic. Met a cute boy:D
REO SPEEDWAGON, STYX & TED NUGENT is TOMORROW! It is time for my favorite season of the year.....ZOO AMP SEASON!
Back in the office - attended the Virtuoso Travel Mart in Las Vegas. Great places to travel and at good prices these days.
#nms7la benchmark test...if a student has a "b" or "L"...printing & having them go through it :)
Ladies:: how many of u would be ok with ur bf staying out at a hotel room til 5 am?? Just curious
take a pic! Please!!
We'll see you at the matinee today at 2pm!! So excited!
My pleasure! Quite the family ya'll got!
And the inadvertent whistle blows "in anticipation of" a foul when Triche drives. There is your summary of the game in one sentence.
My mom's id got stolen . Fuck that... Now we are out 3 thousand dollars😡
TKC men's basketball game tonight at Pratt Institute!
RT : RT : LIMITED TIME - Book now and save 30% on your stay at Hyatt Regency Denver between Sept. 3rd and Oct 4t ...
My first day of summer has been a blast! Happy Summer to all of my Twitter/Facebook friends!!
we should i dont wanna be a loner lol
Last night a horse asked me if I was planning on driving home. There might've been a cop on top of it.
Saturated fat should be kept to a small percentage of your daily calories, so if you eat too much fat, consume more beer & popcorn.
We really appreciate your follow:) come to our facebook page and check out our music, its free:)
Yayyyy my mom just made my day (: ! She said that shes getting shirts and braclets for me on christmas ((((((((:
Take note:in the red zone that's a staple play for the saints...
Nice! I'll get started on that... and then do 50 pull-ups :)
she cute..
need more peeps like you. DSA is better with the type of energy you bring.
- never seen an ep.
Business Briefs
So nice outside. #no sleeping
Speaking of stupid stuff, when are you guys free?
I DO NOT CARE ABOUT NEXT YEAR
MT mexican reporters under constant threat from drug cartels- withhold bylines, travel w/ bodyguards, keep publishing
thanks for the post! :)
Just saw the #TitosTrolley - so cute!!
Im panama wasted......
Thinks he's in over his head.I have 3 1/2 months to fix a problems 10 years in the making! Anyone know how you eat an elephant?
I can never handle someone who is too sensitive
I didn't get it... What did seals and puppies have to do with anything? 
that's the weekend of my last 20+ miler, so I'm a no go. why on earth is it so late?!
touts White House #artsed report
#askbarbara What might make the shift happen? Could you see it coming from the crop circles proving there's other intelligent life?
Check out that brand new Online radio station Tyte FM ....... This is the bay!
I got my phone but can't do anything cause Comcast Internet is down lmfaaoo .-.
RIP Charlie Louvin.
Oh no! Sounds like a famous last tweet.
I have to wait longer to talk shit?! :\
before the day gets too crazy, I am slowly drinking tea, not coffee!
Speaking of Mercadito, have you tried ? What was your favorite dish?
you can still love him though (; LOL
#np the replacements - i will dare
#FF AMAZING handbags!
All the 'cool' kids were doing it! :D
<3 I'm not lol I don't think ima dress up cause they probably said its next week
please follow she is you biggest fan!48
Yes. Very dark. I'm shocked.
bla bla bla that's all guys say we don't care girls don't want to hear your stupid comments only if it it's not boring we care sometimes!!!
God has blessed me. God Bless everybody eles HM^
ed. reform should put ALL students first, not a select few.
If you're in Alabama check us out
OH OH OH OHH
you can do whatever.
follow back? c:
That and WAC, WCC, and MWC have done just fine in Vegas
Yeah when i said i loved you i fucking meant it
miss you #methcat!
I'm in and paid once i get my money,fingers crossed that both days aren't sold out by the 3rd of May.
Just getting back from an exhilarating assignment in Mexico and revving up for this weekend's coverage of Instructions for Peace. Check out…
Tonight, I look in the mirror and see Trayvon Martin's face...I wonder what face George Zimmerman saw - or if he saw a face at all...
I am unfollowing everyone one my Tl who says free boosie , like for real
I'd say we'd love you forever, but we would either way <3
did Say Somethin make you feel a little better?(:
The more independent artists that can make a career, the more diverse the music scene.
Wow so not in a good mood hopefully that will change throughout the day.
congratulations!! Post a pic of the ring please!
I just feel so... Unwanted.
#YouTube Afficial Gorilla Posse
I actually can't wait to hear about sugar on 60 min either
see? Exactly what I said hahaha! See you tomorrow?
Thanks, T.J.! I sent an email today. Looking forward to connecting!
Words cannot describe how messy my room is. I would take a picture to show you but it's too embarrassing
i believe in a thing called love! Just listen to the rhythm of my heart!
ugh Idol threw Jessica under the bus with their song choices; no uptempo songs so people can says she's boring
Pet allergies could be due to food allergies from the food your dog or cat eats.
There will be freshly baked croissants in the apartment each morning this week. To say that I'm excited wouldn't cover half of it.
Thanks for recommending WeSeed! We're here if you have any questions :-)
Yep, I prefer watching the weird looking guys in that video
The Leslie brimmed hat is also on sale...only $30! No coupon necessary!
yay! It'll be awesome sauce! // So fun! <3 you ladies!
Roses are red, my phone is dead. Nobody calls me, forever alone
ML: Another myth: Evangelicals have succeeded in politics because of their unity
Stevekingisms coming fast and loose at the Values Voters Summit. As expected. Will tweet the best...
looks forward to organizing a blood drive in 2012.
First Provost Council-Service this morning in quite a while due to travel (mine and everyone else's!)
I've came to the conclusion that is into milf's.
I knew it! What you on tonight?
we love your stories about #BoyleHeights and the power of youth to enact change!
Happy 5 Years at - and happy amazing LV bag!! xoxo
new favorite number... 59
Oh, I am so sneaky. :) No worries, I work Downtown ... will visit frequently.
This is in the future don't worry. Next Thursday evening event btw. I'm expecting you there.
Looking for Senior Designers and Mid level Animators looking for a European Adventure...
MT : It's not him. It's the same people who've been running that office for 40 years - neocons & bankers.
Tom Felton is in Malibu!!!!! Stalking him
I know I'm made of mistakes, disappointments, and failures, but trust me, there's a part of me worth loving. ♥
when is icon summer camp?
#Jealous, send one to me in Maryland!
Damn , I'm hungry to late to eat
We've been remodeling the bathroom for almost a week. Former narrow tub and cast iron pipes presenting us with "line up" problems.
yeah let them know that you miss him thanks
I'm really digging the look and sound of Tinted Windows. Bun E. Carlos on drums kicks ass!
I have your hoodie all packed up sent you some other #Swagg let us know how you like. Send us some pics
Starting to wonder if anyone can read
"When I'm broken and have no clue where I’m going, I rejoice—because it makes me completely rely on God." -
Slightly disappointed in the styling of some celebrities this year at the MET Gala...I was expecting more
Trust is the single most important factor in both personal and professional relationships.
Ryan Braun MVP speech Page 1- "Sometimes in life, we all deal with challenges we never expected to endure," "We have an opportunity to look
hi ! Your beliefs are vile, and I'm going to block you from following me as soon as I'm sure you've read this, you nut bag!
my dream is to play in warped tour
"He must be a king" "How can you tell?" "He hasn't got shit all over him." - Oh Monty Python... You slay me LoL
You seem so friendly til it's you that has to walk the line.
RT : Do mosquito misters work? Cooling misters do.
yeah I worked too and I work all nights this week except Friday. Mine was alright, how was yours love bug?
I love you so much baby! 😚💗✨ you're so lucky I'm not able to screen shot my wallpaper , mwahahahahaha. 😂😉💓
So, he was arrested for not leaving a porch, but he was cooperative? What?
Switching to the #TwilightZone marathon. It's a #NewYear'sEve tradition.
I believe it's magic :-p
Great drive, what a beautiful country! Tonight a gala event at the Church of Scientology in Los Gatos, tomorrow AM radio show with Sleepy J
Two presentations and one press kit to turn in...then I am home for the Dogwood Azalea Festival! Whoo hoo! :)
I miss when all of my family would get together and have a good time
Thank you! I will keep you informed!
I hope you're taking lots of pictures -- I expect an iChat slideshow when you & E get back...
Likewise. Hope you enjoyed the run.
According to studies, men prefer to have white bedrooms and women prefer to have blue bedrooms
If anyone out there is esp pleased/displeased w/their compact digital camera (UNDER $250), please advise. Researching on CNET, B&H, etc.
Welcome to good burger home of the good burger may I take your order ?(;
1992 miles done, but couldn't ride today due to wicked thunderstorm this am. Hope to get in 8 tonight to hit 2000 on the last day of summer.
As Mahatma Gandhi put it, "A 'no' uttered from the deepest conviction is better than a 'yes' merely uttered to please, or worse, to avoid t…
Touring clients in need of one of the best views in Austin - looking for a *specific* space? We can find it.
I might have tweeted too soon. Programming is back but listings still say sign off. Either way, thanks for getting back to me.
Huevos!!! I know, but add a "J" and it adds the H...sound foo!
“: If educational costs continue to rise & reimbursement continues to fall, huge future train wreck #solvept”
Ok-then in that case my Tip is to breathe, laugh, and enjoy! :)
Dre said that 10 years ago. We were probably watching TV. re: you cant make a ho a house wife.
haha..I said same thing to myself..enjoy your day!!
Cool!!! So jealous! Where'd you see it?
Fuck TV nigga tell um Watch Me
We were given this life because we were strong enough to live it.
Insane.. Thanks for everything... Love you!.. <3
James harden looks like a smaller Rick Ross!
Girl you only have money cause your mother is a stripper. Smh
Donna Murphy and Christopher Fitzgerald are reportedly in talks to star in INTO THE WOODS this summer at the Delacorte Theater.
please~! I really want to go to the SM concert! I've never been to any of their concerts and I LOVE SM Family! <3 고마워~
Okay, okay! I know that now...
I wish I was in vacation! Have a great time! Do some push ups! Ha!
Tagaytay tomorrow !! Miss our house... :(
FYI. The LMA Twitterati WILL call you out - just be nice, kids. Don't make me put on my angry eyes.
Now that's a rap to a perfect christmas day 365 days to go guys ;)
Not yet... still on local news
Thank you! And this is from almost a year ago, I haven't uploaded any recent ones
the theatre waiting to see ya'll. Its been way to long. Love the new album.
nope because I wan't to :). The galaxy is a better place without sava the hut!
I'm sorry.
q5) I'm a fan of workers developing materials, but not generally SMEs; SMEs try to pack in too much, workers focus on need.
hey! sorry, went camping at Sat + missed this. Working on an album! Bathing in music. Whats the latest 4 u?
Win Santos Laguna
You're the weak one, and you'll never know love, or friendship; and I feel sorry for you.
Pet Peeves... 1) Using.periods.like.this! 2) Overusing exclamation points!!! 3) When promoters say "Don't forget to... (buy my shit)"
= a mirror
That's your city. Aren't you proud? :)
Republicans and speculators only care about profit not people
Time for pictures w/ the Mayor MT : gets mentioned #smbmad discussion. That's Mr. Mayor 2 you.
Hahahaha now watching.. ;))
just trying to find a silver lining from the #Rangers loss tonight
after all the planning, thinking, writing. i'm just jittery! let's do this See you in a wink...
are conversation stays in the DM please and thank you lol
CBS SEP 12 2011. AS OF JULY 20 2011 IM AVAILABLE ALL OVER THE WORLD TO PERFORM. TO BOOK ME OR OUR HIP HOP ARTIST.
HEYY DID U CHECK UR INBOX ON FACEBOOK
omg yes.. what was it again ? oh yeah CACKAAA
can the boys give a shoutout to Nicole D from new York and #asktheboyz if they are going to do a call me maybe video:) 26
What animal always goes to bed with its shoes on ? A horse !
TMZ reporting suicide.
Matthew Sherman (Saint Louis U) has written a fine dissertation on the history of US & presidential protection
Thanks to everyone who stopped by the booth at - looking forward to following up soon!
Thank you for the retweet
Like that! What I also want is to draw my finger rapidly across screen and see subsequent pages in quick succession.
ha nice, crazy its already been a year
Trouble is part of your life, and if you don't share it, you don't give the person who loves you enough chance to love you enough.
It should be a fun, hard class, covering Peronism, Arbenz, Mexico in the 50s, Cuba, 1960s and 70s revolution, and commodification.
San Diego! Get to tonight and Thursday night! Summertime in SD!
Tomorrow I am going to do something for NJA. She always does things for others so I am going reward her with something special....
Damn right 👏👏RT : some girls' thirst for attention is out of control.
Clark Kellogg used 'bamboozled' in the telecast tonight...must be March Madness.
lmaooooo kinda yea
#IADMIT I care about you more than you will ever know... but it will never be enough to stay.
Yal know I'm not supposed to have a twitter acount
Only cause people bring it out tho
hanks for following
Make sure you check out the Ebony Embers tribute to the Harlem Renaissance if you are in the #Lousiville, #Kentucky area!...
Spent the day cruisin on my skateboard and listenin to the Beasties. The impact they had on me and countless others is immense.
New shirt launch in 7 days on the relaunch of BA thursdays! Hope your ready.....
Follow my friend he needs followers
Played with UnderGround Horns Yesterday and had madd fun.
Thanks! & I'm quite sure that we've all done this. Case in point that librarians are all undeniably badass.
No one sent me a number? Hold the fuck up ✋
well, has your accountant sent him an invoice? , I'm looking at you.
I have a lie detector edged in my brain
:thank you all for your mentions!
Hey I believe you just got Blacked Out in Dallas on Time Warner Cable!!!!
let's be real
this new #Ubuntu (12.04) is really slick! awesome job & thnx for the good os!
minor network snafus earlier today; working on additional robustness now
#ThingsIReallyCantStand stuck up rich people.
Lips, hips, hair drips down her back. Crazy. Body frame. Crazy. Only girl that can make time then make me. Stop.
Finally caught up with Dexter.. nice to make time for television once in a while!
is love that :) lol down?
no this can't be fucking happening!!!!! damn it cody please wake up..... please
why what happen and why are you sad
I don't care if the politician on SATC liked golden showers. he's hot.
Just got the Flipboard app for my iPad. Love it!
I'll bet when overnights come in, ABC will wish they had done the 14th season cast announcement of #DWTS during the #OSCARS to keep people..
and it is one of my many FAV. PHOTOGS... how are you buddy?
Rest in peace Ritche...February 3, 1959 the day the music died
what r u thinking? what r u feeling?
I am on board with that. Or some type of shocking device.
Salad and two hard boiled eggs. My stomach is still growling.. That's what happens when you work out right before you eat.
Kick ass new tunes in the works! Hear them Oct 29 @ Wild Tymes
Anyone that "fans" my band, For Love of Ivy, on facebook will get a free download! Just send me your email address!
Wish my Dell Studio wouldn't keep having this power problem. Why do they sell you lemons?
What serious person read Enquirer, any way! They are nothing more than bunch of low sensation-looking blood-suckers!
talking re World Bank's experience on Twitter overcoming government speak and red tape to build something meaningful
that's correct. You are the greatest twitterer of all time.
I saw them she showed me lol
Kicking off in Wausau today!
Thanks, Brian!
Finally got that switch big spin down.
lol I love you!
not up to me up to my dad
no i was talking about the media hate. lol.
The certifications indicate that the product was made/grown in a sustainable way.
Tell them you're pregnant. >.<
Packing is no fun.
RT Congrats to tapped as exclusive food and beverage provider for the TundraTailgateZone @ Lambeau Field--TY!
Thanks for the follow, lets get it.
Here's to the Mahomies who named their pets 'Angel' or 'Romo' because of Austin.
Peyton Manning to decide next week per - Brady Quinn to visit the Chiefs per - the #Broncos are mixing it up.
flying to Denver today for the weekend!!
My middle finger won't stop waving at people.
Apple's Coming Map App Will "Blow Your Head Off" (John Paczkowski/AllThingsD)
I wish I didn't have a disease that made me tired all the time so I could actually stay awake.
life my boy. You?
is the star of Happy Feet 2
What stickers would you want to see us make?
Well that was weird. A bloke sends a few DM's and then unfollows me. # Arrivedeci ;) x
yo m going to my bed
can we talk this week
This Monday 5/14 at the Vibe Lounge in Rockville Center w A Faylene Sky, Sirens and Sailors and more! who's coming out??
61.87% on the test, C+ final, Semester B
2night 5:30 - 7:30pm Megan Larmer Co-Pres. will B serving soup, w/a lot of heart, check it out!
Rainy day, workin from home! So I washed all my sheets annd pillow covers so I could take an day nap and spell that yummy detergent smell ha
my goal in life is to make you proud!
Ladies and gentleman, if you see a suspicious package, do not keep it to yourself. I'm waiting on a box from Sears.
The word "Mass" means death and was coined originally by the Roman Catholic Church.
- Just heard a killer song by on XPN2... loved it! Sounded like early Replacements.
“: This is what I'll do I'm gonna finish it today and I'll put it out a clean and a nasty version how about that?”<<<<<THIS
polka dots..
why yes I do... jenny hansson vithayathil
Thx for the follow! Looking forward to tweeting w u
“: It's a great day to be a Trojan, Fight On! #onemoreyear”. Congrats Matt!!
Kinda nervous for tomorrow when I get my new timetable, betcha I'm in classes with all the new 5th years. And not the 5th years I like
Wayne, you are extra spicy tonight! And I love it.
im just chilling
#StirOSU Breakfast is on!
#unitedairlines #fail 3rd call to get miles refunded (for upgrades I didn't get) and there is a 35 minute wait AGAIN - I used to love United
Im gonna be on the plane to Dallas the day after the last day of school. Im too ready
I'm glad #finley signed with the #packers. Not only is he a good player - I just like his name. "jermichaelfinley"
Oh, six-pack abs-guy at end of show: Emily 's not missing out on anything. You're an arrogant jerk.
Who is the last person you want to see come out of a Escalade with tinted windows?
Arrooooooo! you iz cute (wiggles brows)
RT RT this if you’d like to save 20 minutes per load of laundry with our ultra fast #LGTurboWash technology
spammers taking over twitter, wtf
is planning ANOTHER live chat for THIS weekend  thats awesome! So excited i love her so much 
upside is the Celfics played AWFUL on the road and still almost won
That's what we like to hear :)
Mason and James from the X show LIVE now here! Stop by then come back for the Local Xposure Finals tonight
dude my 25yr old aunt is in love with you. She thinks you are the finest guy ever.
auditioned for a Nescafe commercial.
HARRY'S SUPER HIGH NOTE IN GBY. DEAD.
Yea, i opened a credit card with a terrible rate just so i could get bonus miles and a free trip to jamaica. hopefully. see you there NYE
"I'm feeling a lotta heat coming up off that couch man!"- DMX in BELLY
boring weekend... imma have that, "but theres always room for improvementt!" *teachers voice*
so tired of microsoft products stalling on me that I am going to look for alternatives. Sorry Bill.
If Rudy Gay plays like the 2nd best player on the floor only behind CP3, which he's capable of, the #Grizzlies are going to win this series.
one of my favorite tracks of all time bro. Good pick
Could I become a psychic? How do you gain experience/credibility? Predict friends' futures, wait a few years, e if things pan out?
Thanks so much for your support of WA Legislature twitter petition. Thrilled to report- mission accomplished. Bills passed
Ice Cube just stole my table.
Happy Presidents' Day!!! Have the day off? Stop by for lunch. We are opened until 6 pm today. (410) 276-6787
School is out! What are your plans for Winter break?
wheres the like button?
I think I'll definitely go with the integrated seat -- I had no idea they existed. Thanks!
(covered by Javier Colon... even better... in my biased opinion!) Check it out though! ;)
Knope can now close the library!
Happy New Year's Eve, Peeps!!
Sweet! Looks like a cool project.
Happy birth day :) 16! :D
thanks man i appreciate it
Win! RT : Tip: On iOS5/the iPhone 4S, you can use the volume button on your headphone cord as a remote camera shutter!
I do! I love red hair a lot, I wish I could pull it off :)
you're super hot, fire hot like the sun in the sky (;
Hi Simon. Thanks for the follow. How are you?
Thank you Have a GREAT weekend
Ravens pick Miami WR Streeter in 6th round
tommorow is friday i been waitin for you since monday baby lol
thanks guys!
Falling in and out of love with you..</3
Merry Christmas everyone!!
TONIGHT STARFUKCER SATURDAY gonna be an amazing night we hope to see you there
What a perfect snowy day to settle in with a book! I chose "Sofia's Dream" illustrated by & published by
Concussion Crisis
this is amazing , write more(::
Thank you! Happy Thursday!
Just as long as we grow together.
while i appreciatee the military i really would rather be in front of all these guys in line at immigration:(
RT: Cross something off your own bucket list , have on your show to dance and to showcase their amazing new book
STOP SOPA and PIPA Tell Congress HANDS OFF OUR INTERNET!
I don't think anyone can understand my love for Selena (not Gomez,the original)more than my friend Nikki. Biddy biddy bambaaaaaa
I just took a college exam. Palms sweating & shaky with exhaustion. Obviously, I'll do anything for a book, but this was prof's idea...
It's so sad 2know tht #MWT has ended :((I'll miss how tweeted about EVERYTHING I know he'll have more time for us now but ...
About eat
Movies With Nina Tonight >>>>>>
&#39;Avengers&#39; set to rescue Disney - and Hollywood
yeah, so whats up
Little Saxy tiger
Thanks Ben! I appreciate your support! :)
Damon Just answered my question!!.<3
For this Saturday's Olympic Qualifying semifinals, El Salvador will play Honduras at 5 p.m., and Mexico will play Canada at 8 p.m. at
Thanks. There are some interesting stories today.
is on campus for a Stritch Blood Drive until 3 p.m. today. Want to donate blood? Head over to the Fieldhouse/Gym
hahaha #creighton how do you lose like that?!?
thank you :) God bless you to bro
Had to sneak out. Sorry we missed each other!
OK first and last word on #Ravens schedule...
I just wanna lay down by the pool...
Gone to Cabo for the winter!!!! See you on Cinco de Mayo!!
I hate wind more than anything
math is tough. Been many years since used this crap
You'll never learn to become Old and Wise if you were never young and crazy!
Creepin' on at Lifetime. Awkward..
Buffy marathon! Drool.
You're still thinking about ice cream?
haha and didn't like it x
Running a stock market simulation in class today. Who will make a fortune; who will lose it all?
excellent. I know a bunch of that crew, good group! congrats.
#WBWednesday "A happy life consists not in the absence, but in the mastery of hardships." - Helen Keller
that's coo I'm a huge mma fan I probably have more knowledge of the sport than anyone! Who's your favorite fighter?
I also love Roger Sterling.
Coming home :)) I'm staaaaarrrrvvviiinnnggg LOL:)
right I hurts?
Hope everyone had a safe and fun night last night - Downtown Austin is a blast on St Patrick's Day and SXSW!
I think sex is better than logic but I can't prove it.
Goodmorning loves not looking forward to this Sol
actually your wrong you can say "praise be to allah" or "all praise is due to allah" so uh...yahh
Social web ib panel was fantastic.
I'm not comin back to the US. I can't leave London.
The good news is when I am done with these last four rounds of chemo I will be DONE with treatments.............. the end is in sight
Do not lose courage in considering your own imperfections. Saint Francis de Sales
DURANT ! That is all I have to say!
I appreciate that you cover stories with depth and clarity.
360 spin? You won't be confused for a math genius. Try 180. 360 is facing same direction he started.
Just seen Amber Rose on Wendy and loved her!!
More than I can say!
It was great meeting you this week! Hope you have a safe trip back to Martin and best of luck with the internship!
Gwyneth + Goop have nothing on you!
congratulations to Maine Community Health Options for winning a huge CMS grant set up a non-profit CO-OP in ME!
Looking up there's always skies, rest your head I'll take you high and we won't fade into darkness..
Finally a skate session! It has been weeks since I got back on the shred sled!
I cannot sleep when its this hot in my room. It's like 357532478874335788433.25 degrees.
GO PACERS
So are we! RT : excited for premiere of my brand-spanking new "Now or Never" on 9/27 at !
if that doesnt work scrub hard with soap and water then let it dry and just like pick it off
We are currently mesmerized by the Asian kid in the front row who has been emotionless and unimpressed all night.
Hurry up and get those orders in! Campaign 19 must be in noon tomorrow, but I will be at school so I have to put it in tonight! I will wait!
Now that I un-protected my twitter, all those lovely porn bots can follow me. Thanks guys!!
I cant get Michel Telo's song "Ai se eu te pego" out of my head. Its so catchy!
I think I'm sitting next to jared the subway guy.
What's higher than number one... ?
Come on people, start following (:
Game tonight at home vs South Carolina. We kick off at 7 pm, we need all the support we can get !
follow for followw? :)
Man chooses which part of the bible he believes in all the time. Should you be allowed multiple wives, do we stone people, etc.
Happy birthday to Muhammad "the greatest ever" Ali. Float like a butterfly and sting like a bee for another fifty years champ!!
World Cup Soccer Thursday: (7am - Greece/Nigeria) (11:30am - France/Mexico) (6:30pm - Argentina/South Korea)
it was a pretty unlucky situation turned lucky hahaha
Absolutely, cool logo but where can we get your music?
Just left the eye doctor I look like I'm straight rolling face hahah
Kate Upton is the Motto
My latest intention is to live a visually interesting life.
Baseball and runnin'
The lovely to celebrate her birthday at Saturday the 7th! , looking forward to...
Its a beautiful day in San Diego...& I'm stuck inside this restaurant working.
Las Vegans get a life. Obama didn't create unemployment here. Let's ask our local officials what are they doing for Nevada.
My sympathies on your loss-- his life sounds remarkable.
henrik = best goalie on this planet!!!!
my hair doesnt even get curly , it gets wavy :/
At least he was honest tho...lotta niggas stay flaugin like they blowin strong...and it be pure bullshit!!
Thanks for the Retweet! Hope to see you there.
The #nytimes ran some great obits today. Too bad about the date. Lady from the Cornelia St cafe must have been lovely!
ohh cause im ordering my phone tomorrow .. is that individual ?
I will be at Terrace 390 celebrating a good friends bday. Come join us tonight! :-)
Thanks for Found LA tweets!
#Republicans chose a man who decried "Reagan-Bush" over #Gingrich or #Santorum. What a ringing endorsement of the conservative movement.
"If someone was heads up in the shoot out 2nd table and tweeted they did a 15% save does that qualify them to be dq'ed"
We love it!
the fave to win Cup rarely does. Wings have been "locks" to win Cup, as Pens r this year, & have fallen flat. I know the pain
Louis C.K. might be the funniest man in America
yes! That's why, he's so sweet :)
Awesome how about your.....But sad of Premier League Soccer yeasterday:(
Good night yep been up for almost 24 hours just 3more hours to go but to bf im going to sleep :) peace out <3 One Direction
just did a little unscheduled maintenance on the OMC grinder to keep flowing. OMC w/out caffeine * Monday = CouldGetUgly
How bad did KC over pay Winston?
Forecast for Tuesday Night: Partly cloudy in the evening then low clouds and fog. Lows 54 to 59. Light winds.
Totally! He threatened libel in the comments section of my blog, ha!
Chokeholds are not fun...
shooting baccarat winners w/
I could never work in HR.
oh gee thanks!
I bet tomorrow's going to be an awesome day though ;)
I can't believe the table moved, Cray!
katy perry is awesome!!
LOVE your pics! And congrats on your news! :)
happy happy birthday to you!
No matter how fast you run Michael Myers will some how walk faster
give pappa Steve a hug for me
love it!!
Sad to see ABC 7's GM Emily Barr leave - she understands military families, and being a Navy wife during her tenure, I can't tx her enough.
Morning!! -_- Don't forget to have something for breakfast!
welcome to the wild world of tweetdom! Glad that the twitter box inspired you...
GREAT NEWS!! All filing fees have been sent to the IRS woo hooo we is a LEGAL 501C3 NON-PROFIT www.pledge4patriots.com WE SUPPORT THE CAUSE
Two great days of earn your turn skiing! The legs are feeling it so today will be filled with chairlift rides;-)
We've tweeted it a hundred times dude.
RT : Media Coverage in a Fragmented Media Age - Join us May 25 to hear from our local media experts! ow.ly/4VN8u
your still a twat..
Leaving for Atlanta in week and my hubby already telling me how much he'll miss me...tickles my ears. :D
Occupy corporations on Twitter by trolling.
I've been distant from a lot of people the past week or so, I don't know why..
Today marks the 73rd anniv. of Kristallnacht. CANDLES docent Walter Sommers was in Hamburg that night and witnessed the destruction.
You bet. cheers
Great win tonight Mavs
Today's been a really long day...
I'll look into late next week James.
So this is what my brain feels like with 8 hours of sleep. Day four of complete and total relaxation.
And off to the theater with our capes and gloves!!!
#daleearnhardtjrjr nice sound on #Conan. First time for me.
Thanks! Love the show.
Ugh, I do NOT miss that!
So ready for the Super Bowl so I can watch the giants win already
Hope you're doing well at Ball State my man! -Jared
Good morning world. Off to work
Twitter, the highest rated Soap Opera of the 21st Century.
Major Consumer Brands and Companies are experiencing a "social synapse" when Considering the "Voice of the Employee!"
Birds are chirping in NYC!
Another awful week out of Colston, kid's got T.O. hands. That's not a good thing.
Is this really going to help the LGBT community? It's been known for years anyway...
is it lame that this is actually my favorite class or
i love doctor stalker song espiecally when im getting changed to go out and its blasting, iloveyouuu!!!!!
days like this i just wanna stay in bed!!
follow NOW
I had a moment of creativity...
Just a few spots remain for our Career Fair on 5/16 in #ROC. We can help you fill your open positions!
Thanks Knox! - Joe
At Olivee Garden :D
lol the two days
I love you too :)
im young(:
Looks like the Austin opening of GOD BLESS AMERICA has bumped to May 25th. It airs tonight on HDNet Movies as a "sneak preview"!
I actually think that works best- peer to peer interactions RT : Let them hang out. They will learn anyway.
when I was little I was planning on stealing Prince Eric from Ariel. Until they had a child together. 
He is so good.
hahaa no we have tomorrow to copy it!
no problem! Keep up the hard work in Paris, can't wait to see you back in the league!
Should probably lay off the Patsy Cline during this season without my man.
they 24 hours after my last final which is friday. But I can talk them about staying as long as I need.
I just may be celebrating Easter Sunday exactly the way I dreamed....singing live <3 Amazing Grace <3
Zilla Man killing the mic right now...
Please Post. Please support homelessdogmusic launch Jan 2012
I think Michigan State gots this ( :
Hey, babe- I'm at www.theredcanarychicago.com tomorrow until 11:30 so once again I will miss you there. Keep me posted&xo
what happened :(
I cringe on the outside and tell them to knock that nonsense off. :)
Thanks for the suggestions!
is it y our job to push them out the proverbial closet or be in denial of their sexuality?
My tiny Huddles treat is killing me! Death by frozen yogurt (or the gummy bears & animal crackers are battling)!!
If you want to tell me you love me but text it like "Ily" Don't get mad When I text back like "k" There IS a differnt meaning... JS
Calvin Johnson Field at Detroit Megatron Stadium
Americans generally don't fit in Serie A just because the style is so different. Fast and direct vs. slow and technical.
: sidebar...why/how have u sent 90,000+ tweets?! How?! Lol
Sometimes I really like taking cold showers
"Lincoln’s hallmarks are design, technology and comfort" Mark Fields, President Ford Americas
They just corrected it.
hell yeah
. Thank you! We couldn't do the work we do without the support of our very generous members.
3 career 5-hit games is pretty legit too.
RT : #fact I used to call Brosius "Ferocious Brosius"
at rehearsal at asu picking my butt! Come over here and let's drink!
Time to get this workout rollin with AC-G³
It really does. World Sbk should be awesome this year! Who is your early pick this year?
Coincidentally enough, that was also the last known sighting of 's big boy pants.
Tomorrow starts off an incredible month for me and Interactive. I hope you have a great one too!
Top of the afternoon twitterville!
you have no game
it's going to be epic! Are you attending?
pimping out my myspace now looking hott
WE HAVE 3 WINNERS !!! Thanks every one for my first contest
FOREVER ALONE *trollface*
those pictures from Australia....
#FollowFriday Corpus Christi Peeps!
Craving chocolate? Come get one of our Chocolate Easter Bunnies!
My iPhone is now pink
ohh yeah! Tommy!!
ok ima french kiss it lmaoo!!
you will do NO such thing
lol i would too
Today's new cities on #YouTown: City of Edmonton (AB), City of Gulfport (FL), City of Lynn (MA), City of Maricopa (AZ)
shoulders stiff...now I have to do something about it. Uggh. Turning in.
"We are getting data obese."
Physical Post. I think Dre will be great next year with all this experience already.
Sad. Yeah, I don't even wanna think about food right now.
Got $10? Head to and drink unlimited taps tonight! WOO HOO!
I just love that "fail whale" well maybe just the term :-)
LEAP is only available to U.S. patrons because Bookshare's arrangement with publishers only applies to U.S. copyright laws.
Spring Break was GREAT! How about yours? (: <3
|#quotes The future you see is the future you get.
I got a date with the cheese/tapas buffet later on tonight. Who's with me? Starts at 430! I'll be there from 630-??
Miami! Tomorrow night & & myself are recording a DVD be apart of the live audience, msg me for tix!
It was great meeting Scott, Steve, and everyone else! It was awesome working with you guys!
im so glad alli and cody are home.
It was a fabulous time! RT representin' at #WERCNRC! Great time catching up with in line back to the A!
How Apple's stores turned into a retail juggernaut
This evening, 6-7 pm, Pilates at Chatham Village's Clubhouse, in Mt. Washington.
69$ Divorce Custody,Bankruptcy,Evictions,Paternity,Divorce, Child Support (813) 352 3275 Tampa\Clearwater Call NOW
It's not the man who has too little, but the man who craves more, that is poor. - Seneca
I am wondering if that opens to the door to patent say a robusto sizing? I wonder if it is just this size of chisel or all?
makes me feel like I should get back into marathon form again like the "old" days.
Thanks Colleen!
Is there any tips u can give me to make it to the college level for bball? i want to get there and make my mom proud.
doing what I can to help others reach their full potential, which includes sometimes just getting out of the way
IF U WANNA B IN ENTERTAINMENT and GET PAID P IMAGE P DON MEGA PRODUCTIONS u will work hard but u will not regret it
Wow it looks like its gnna rain:))
Enjoying my Friday night with Mom Adams! When nothing else could help, love lifted me!
RT : tonight! lisa ridgely & the fainting room will appear on 's local/live radio show at 8 p.m.!
Danny Espinosa, ADDICTED TO GLOVE!! Nice scoop to help out Gio..
I'm just trying to live life to the fullest and #FollowMyDreams til the day I day. Shout out to all my peoples here in #Detroit doin it big.
Hello World. I'm back. But not for long.
Listening to creator of Khan academy talk. So cool!
&#9754; Protect your rights
I just heard the OMG Girlz new song & it really dont sound like them ....
9th what grade are you in
Word is Chris Hardwick may be looking at a guest set tonight and tomorrow at Helium!
Cant believe I'm saying this,but I'm actually kinda excited for school today (:
Just as a candle cannot burn without fire, men cannot live without a spiritual life. - Buddha
#HowHotIsYourGrandma ... Post it up
Reading 1st G of T book on your indirect suggestion. Can't wait to see the show
im gonna play fruit ninja with myself(; #LOL im a iphone
Brian Sorby/EMC likens storage market today as dinosaurs vs. mamals. sooner or later mamals win because of adaptability ...
You may say I'm a dreamer, but I'm not the only one - John Lennon
Damn this new track is a banger!
RT #chs + needs an experienced lead line chef, full time. Great restaurant + owners.
I had that last summer! Awesome poster.
listening to all day long has made my day infinitely better.
Omg the stress!!
Ugh! Connecticut, why are you so wide?!
HAHAHA follows all members of I fuckin' LOVE that bear.
Tumbled marble gives a European appearance and works well with a range of bathroom materials.
Mad Men and Hunger Games this week? The fanatic in me can't handle it.
Bout to be I the treadmill and only eating salad
Needed a nap and took one. Today is good. : )
can't go wrong with the flank steak!
Attending my first NGS this week! Arriving in Charleston tomorrow afternoon. Looking forward to seeing others there!
i keept my emotions bottled up thats why i can snap so easily !
En route to Fun to be going there while Korean present is in town!
I'm crying
It's time for a James Van Der Beek cameo on Mad Men me thinks.
I thru my hands up in the air sometimes saying ayohhh, im a weirdooooohh
Got my ISRC codes, and BDS info in the email this morning.. BOOM! Album coming SOON!
Too much to do today....so I think I'll be ridiculously perverse and take a nap.
"finders keepers" Bitch Shut The f*** Up And Give Me My Shyt Bck.! Haha
If you're at the Annual Rural Health Conference today, be sure to stop by booth 304 and say hi to our CommunityWorks team!
We have a new server ready - vpn-co34 OpenVPN (SSL) server in London, UK
I can put in a 5 hour shift at the library and still look like a huge pussy compared to
Chill time in prospect park w my old buddy Wes. Love watching the little league games.
So sad for many reasons 1 He was young & talented 2 The world needs artists 3 My students LOVE that song & now we'll assoc. it w/ violence
Woot! MT : Bring Your Own Code day at was a success! Lots of happy researchers ready to compute on Lonestar.
Three more days til I'm Mrs. Smith..#fistpump lol Good Morning Twit Fam!
is going to be god tonight! is performing tonight ;)
Portofino Restaurant In Bermuda With My Pal Guillermo From Guatemala!
When a women is in her ninth month of pregnancy she has 18
Waiting to see Eleanor Friedberger at Black Cat
Nothing like spending time with the family & their mobile devices, eh?
I need something to eat
Thx to the Chamber for today's debate and Ballantyne/Warren for tonight's. Happy 2 be THE voice supporting the Marriage Amend.
Hey Eddie. Thanks for the listen and post. So glad you liked it!!!
Italian ambulance w/ lights & sirens sped by To Rome With Love set; slammed on its brakes, backed up; crew got out and took pics w/ actors.
Why is Friday so far away from Monday, but Monday so close to Friday?
Many thanks, albeit belated, for the Airplane Novel comments. ~ Paul
Iphone it is! Thanks #Tweeps for all the help. You guys are the best :)
I remember seeing that 2 years ago when it first went around and we were in Austria. hilarious...
why is it tht at the hgh schl level, the morning announcements are 90% sports related and no academic success stories? Culture?
Need more sleep!!!!
On my way to the game lets go 49ers!!!
Gonna be an athletic trainer next year!! Yayy.<3 ((:
Saturday Nite's Smoking Sessions is supposed to be HOT this week too....Looking forward to it all...Come chill n smoke w us....
no, did it close?
I disagree on Charlie, I enjoyed it for what it was.
Well Damn but y u stop Fuckin wit me Doe !?!?
My twin still owes me potato wedges !
ur welcome kisses...do u have a oovoo or skype?
Rehearsing for the Nov 30th Bad Bad Baby Shower with the Bad Bad Supergroup. ;)
lunch hour and my co-worker just left for her lunch. why am i alone the busiest time of day? we need a floater.
I might come soon and when we go to London this summer.
I was just thinking that....haha
Our story with a 2014 #Butler target, Sean Sellers ( ) as he talks this season and recruiting.
I appreciate that. Have some fajitas for me too, please. And a Negra Modelo.
Junior's death confirmed a suicide. Waiting to see if family will give permission to study his brain.
#OpeningDay! Who's ready for some baseball?
If you have time this weekend, be sure to visit City Sandwich and order the Pavia.
Swisher Sweet!
well I'm not looking for a big trade.
Wow I go shower and get my shit ready for work and its 10-3 holy crap
lol still love you
GGS to everyone on peaceful jays stream in umvc3.
Ask hundred friends what slut means and they'll tell you it isn't good. Your stance is pathetic.
There are so many students rocking our hair flowers today at Xavier University for #Earth week! THIS CAMPUS is #BLOOMING :D
Live, love, laugh and pass it on! Joy grows when shared!
Hapy Mother's Day as well to my wifey The mother of my child & the love of my life. I love u baby
RT Never a better ending to fake Twitter account than There are only 150 Tweets. Start at bottom & go up.
Game on? Seat open? Is everyone stuck and tilting?
Please follow ! She loves you so much! #Enchancer  14
": God is basic Fact. He must not be thought of as a featureless generality. He is the most concrete thing there is."
Just watched ur performance on The Voice (:
Congratulations, Emily! Excited to have you as part of the program!
It's your call. <3
What we just talked about is not what I call "working it out" :-\
Saturday sunshine
thanks for the RT!
Swaggy With Daya LETS GET IT TRENDING GUYS!
Wait, Billy Bragg licensed his music to flippin' "Love and Other Drugs?" :(
Yo I'm so sore, it's not even funny!
Just finished my Spanish final! Now, I have two study halls
There is no store, but we will have some drums at an Austin drum shop soon! I'll have an update on the site when this happens
Real Estate Investing Techniques-Use time wisely, stick to reachable goals, strategize & be a people person!
BOO. It's Kiara again lolol
Thanks to whose contribution pushed us over 200 policies in the online database
All I want is for everyone to be Happy & Healthy, Peace on Earth, & Joy to the World. But as usual, I'll have to settle for Egg Nog.
hey cuzzo. All is good on my end. Ok, let me know. I have a photo gig Sunday & leave for Chicago on Monday. Gotta pack
An hour and twenty minutes left of this suffering
lol 2 days ago on tv with J. Hud!!! Beating!! I heard u!! Lol
its not my falut i can hear you and Capi!
" Nothing is so strong as gentleness. Nothing is so gentle as real strength." -Frances de Sales
Don't miss Flannagan's annual reading of Molly at Symphony Space's Bloomsday celebration. It's avail online. Yes.~D
Andrew from MWW Designs >>>
I lived in NYC for 3.5 years & never received mail from , as soon as I move back to SF, I end up on their mailing list.
at hershey park?
Much Obliged!
iSmile Only Becuss I'm Hiding The Pain Within <3
you would.
I like how her apology is on the K-State coloring sheet. Just saw that Eric Stonestreet wants to get in touch with her parents.
I'm just trying to be a decent person.
#ThoughtsDuringSchool I'm so hungry...! When Is the period over??
Haha he said Chris Griffin
I randomly met 2 dudes with engineering doctorates that work in airline safety. Cell phones aren't dangerous on flights
Smoke something!! Only kush not that other shit!! Lol
Just did. Now what? ;)
Robot hearts!!!
I wanna go to a party
Undernutrition in the womb may increase the risk of disease such as diabetes in adult life.
It's a different between Hood and Evil.
Sitting in the MOC for the Atlas V launch; looks like any other battlestaff...just missing the CNN on the screens! T minus roughly an hour
Reading #netsmart Excellent! Thank you!
What was CJ Watson doing????
thank you so much for following us! :) <3 
Damn shit pops off in class
UAGGGHHHHSDFJSKLF I think I might cry.
trying to layoff on the tacos. Lol.
I was just thinking about that...
How's boxing match?
RT if u love and they r ur life BIG TIME RUSH and if eveywhere u go u see a rusher plz follow
Study Focuses On Mentally Challenged Accused Of Crimes « CBS ...
I don't know what it is, but something about your face makes me wanna plant one in your suck hole.
i want sum chicken !
is there an official statement from DOJ re: recall petitions?
Ah shucks Thanks! How U B?
I think I have a talent for being able to tell which white people would've owned slaves two hundred years ago.
RT : #2 = Adapt to your boss. "4 Surprising Strategies that Get You Promoted" #leadership (New)
Learned a new word for bannanagrams: zaftig which means plump
that's sick man! What band was that with?
Happy Friday the 13th. Make it your lucky day.
has best job in world! Uses technology to improve health of people... with IOM et al Data Initiative Project #TEDMED. Maximize!
ur welcome. thank u
CBS gave away a Denver game at the height of Tebow-mania? Someone's going to get his butt kicked there!
If Mariano Rivera is retiring, I'm requesting a James Hetfield & Metallica live performance from the bullpen in the home finale.
Water keeps you hydrated and helps to curb your appetite until you get something healthy to eat.
Hunan's sesame beef!
yes I do!! Haha
I absolutely love video "Heart Attack", perfect concept, combo with was on point !!! Hotness !!!!
Sometimes i just want to fall asleep & never wake up.
thank you :)
" You've been quoted in my #Storify story "Tweet This SIG!" " No messin' around at Skidmore!
I guess i will cook me something to eat and fix me a good drink.
you bought your tickets? Let me know when you're here, I'd love to catch up!
People STILL be sending those shits!?
believes I'm influencial in Prison.. thanks?
Triple H holding a real belt behind Mayweather. Why Beiber?
Austin bound!
I always have that exact same problem! so upsetting :(
Thats why Kendrick Lamar is so cold, he can rap his ass off and his flow and delivery are on point
That was the most random tonight ever. have a nice Tuesday everyone
If #yahoo patents were critical to #socialnetworking why isn't yahoo successful as #facebook? If #yahoo could have done Facebook they'd be
Ok. I will get on it. Thanks.
Just posted a new "deal". You can either check in or mention this update to receive 20% off any jewelry repair service!
probably the perfect pick. I'd love to! samueldzimmerman at gmail
Awesome-ness is contagious! RT : Thank you for the mention, you are awesome.
Just wondering what poseidon's plans are if San O power never comes back on?
"When I was your age, television was called books"-Princess Bride quotes.
Kateex ! Stole all my ideas ! <3 :) But She is Style one of my best friends !
Wolfman's Brother
Based on Socialcam's angel round, everybody (and I do mean everybody) is a tech investor. Being the Instagram for X has its merits.
Make sure to tune in to News 3 at 10 if you are in #Madison...great story about great finds on our vault!
Who knew you could make a friend at the airport... Haha
Are you on our email list? Visit www.friendsofhowardfootball.org to sign up.
How many ads do you see on the right hand side when you go to pages? I'm seeing 7 right now..
Yay! We'll be flying in next week! :)
Happy #Valentine's Day everyone :)
Love the Anti Power Point Party!!
Had SO much fun! & throw such elegant parties. Excited to work with you all at #MissSantaMonica!
just wanna see ya.. SHAKE THAT! LOL
3 Best Exercises For Your Abs Side Plank-6 reps of 10 seconds Quadruped Opposition - 20 reps each side Crunch 3 sets of abdominal fatigue
Alright, enough is really enough.
Next speaker is , USA Health Policy Reporter
Today KMGH FM 88.9 broadcast my recordings of "Cry Me a River" and "How High the Moon" !! Aloha Harlingen, TX!
0 Visua mobile vodafone wallpapers web youtube
Got projects? Upcoming project photography trips to Chicago, GA, SC, NC, LA, TX, OK, MO. Contact me for a quote.
this is ruining my big island scoop prediction. although i got love for Waimea - that's where lauren's family is all from.
without it twitter is pointless
Never fails I'm having the perfect dream then my alarm wakes me up -_-
I always hear pundits talking about how Cain seems so "Likable" and "Charismatic". But to me he seems stuck up and cold.
(That's Very Important Tweets.)
guess how old loll
Wonder why hasn't invited "Think Like A Man" cast on to promote?
well played.
the good always die young.
Only an idiot (or maybe a moron) would want to discuss that as anything but trash...could not watch pass first 10 minutes..
awww hope for the best! REAC is a client of Sound Investment Audio in Chicago who also does AV for weddings too! Check'em out
I know I keep harassing all of you, but Ill make it all up to you tomorrow at Double Door for the ehLee Entertainment event.
$14 for $30 worth of eye shadow, lip gloss, mascara, nail polish, eyeliner, blush or bronzer.
Fair words fill not the belly.
Well, after explaining that I used her pic to brag about her, she calmed down.
Sweet Baby Blue Swim Trunks...Im at a baseball game and I just screamed like a teenager...Lord have mercy! That man will be the death of me!
Girl I hope you got yo stamina up
Early day of work. Nothing to do which is good cuz i feel lazy
Pleasure chatting at length with ya, man. Please look me up if you ever find yourself in NYC. We'll drag out
"It's raining in San Antonio...Hallelujah!
If I had the power to change the world, I would not use it so that you can get the answer you want to hear.
you have a private/locked account. I can't retweet your posts
I will be talking on #FOX45 tom. morning at 9:45am about how "Anyone Can Be an #Actor or #Model." Please check it out & tell your friends!
I am good.. what about you?
Phone problems are fixed! Apparently the battery was swelling (?!) so that was causing it to shut off randomly...
Hova. RT : 'If you like it then you should have put a pin on it.' Said here first.
Can this summer be like last please? Starting this Saturday?
Absolutely not!
Would appreciate it if would stop braggin bout the concert and making me jealous!! Thank you :)
What are you doing on this lovely holiday weekend?
Advertising execs?!?! Always about the money.... ;)
if u follow me we could direct message
#ificouldiwould sleep all day.
agreed - there is still a solid satisfaction in handing over a stack of coupons to the cashier!
Exactly. The Crazies.
& how did that end up 2 him kissin u
Brewer Game tonight. Hoping they actually show up to play!
Mr. just proclaimed war vs. #teammongoloid. He said we're gonna be sleeping in the hallway tonight.
Great webinar today with Mike from hosted by Thanks guys!
Don't judge me when Lil Wayne got a dick on his forehead
Blunts and bongs >
Yeah... with vodka!
you deserve everything Austin. You've come so far & worked for every ounce of it. I'm proud to call you my idol.
I've been checking out a lot of new music lately but nothing is really capturing me. Everything sounds old and faded.
aww thank you dear! It was our pleasure : )
sorry to hear that :/ I hope I do, there's no way I can miss All Time Low :P
Same here! RT : I've never read any science fiction and think I might try it. Suggestions are welcome.
At party. So far, it's basically the media
I'm tired of this rain and wind, but I said it like Samuel L. Jackson.
I wonder if 640 million people will win a dollar tonight
but if he does sign to good music, pusha t gonna need a new home.
Cool fact. RT : 2,000 electric vehicles to hit #SanDiego streets this year alone; 10% of the 20,000 Nissan Leafs ordered by San Diegans
Good morning.
Last quarter of high school...holy shit
I think the business is too overwhelming to some folks. No restrictions on what we can put up really.
ya girll... im doing the activites now. ugh
You are very welcome! :)
Please call dalton and tell him to call the mod office and tell one of them to wakeup -___________-
I think I love my mr.wrong
National Geographic-/Inside Outlaw Bikers -Hell's Angels Documentary Part 1 of 5 [HQ]
And there was much rejoicing!
Enjoying the first of a few days off from work. Much needed time at home on the farm and God has blessed me with a beautiful day!
hardest thing about the holidays is: RomanZolanski_
Passed out at 7:30 last night surrounded by casebooks, highlighters, and outlines. Definitely time for
Saturday note - don't ever give up on your dreams. Let your desire burn strong! Hope your wknd is fab!
You Tube - the best education source in the world.
Can't wait for the Enrique halftime show on Thursday!
We have not tweeted in forever! That changes today!
"I close my eyes but I can see questions circling. How do I realize the dreams you sparked in me?"
Who inspires you the most and why?
your welcome
The world uses a tanker of gas every 13 minutes
RT : Now would be a bad time to reboot the social media monitoring servers, wouldn't it?
so enjoyed newyorkunderground radio! they really showed me love and they played my tracks stop by fridays and tuesdays
Guys ethans awesome!:)
Getting ready for summer vacation? Show your love of the 'Burgh wherever you go with our quality tees.
You guys earned it!
Pardon our mess while we begin setup for our next special show inside the conservatory!
Dudes name is Marian?
Just so you guys know (in case you care) Target is not open on Easter. But I can't take the shift bc MAGNETIC FIELDS CONCERT YES YES.
#Comicon a life of science headed is headed to Columbus for our first Comicon also we will be playing on Saturday!!!!!
Perhaps Ms Larimore should read the article she is referencing. That was a sloppy review and missed the mark.
Test Game – Please Ignore
It pays off to keep in touch with friends near and far. I am incredibly lucky to have such amazing people in my life.
So fired Shyam Das? Only shocked by that it took them this long. Unbelievably petty response. Das ruled as he had to based on facts.
we're all just people trynna' make it through life. & we don't need your bitchy attitude to do it.
when the ladies were fighting and the opera singing was hilarious! Last night was funniest by far!
Now what am I gonna watch Monday nights...
My 18 WP installs happy as clams. I'm pretty rigorous about maintenance. The oldest are 8 years old! Only one site ever hacked.
Children in elementary are playing a new game called Rape-Tag (like freeze tag, but they do hip thrusts).
uhm me? idgaf if you want to or not
Indeed...which makes tonight's decision all the more headscratching.
You're more than a lover There could never be another To make me feel the way you do
Wasn't saying the travel was crazy. Sheesh. Just think it's crazy they still have a shot at home-ice advantage.
I say Democrats should be the working class unless you have Independents like Bernie Sanders,and I don't like Joe Lieberman.
Free wifi at the MCC during #ala11. But will it work? That's the question.
yes!!! Omg, that would be so much fun!
Congrats to DBV for winning the non-profit altar contest!
Probably WR (players like Jenkins and Adams could provide downfield threat) but it's a tough question.
So happy to be finally done with all my classes! xD
I'll go with u Chris and drive us :)
With my childhood friend Carla
In November 1682 complained to Fort Oranje Court that he was called an "old, dubious, rascal."
Borgman: Google searches are optimized to find the best consumer projects not to find the best research
Oh and please eat several beignets for moi.
Go !!!!! RT: Paul Casey joins McIlroy at 14 under. They trail leader Fredrik Jacobson by three shots.
Thanks to everyone who came to my talk at today. Was great to see so many people there.
Reading your blog "My First Day at School" is fun! It really made me reminisce my school days! #verygoodcomposition :-)
Ahh I wish. It is looking like August now. Things are super busy. How are you? I miss you all!
specifically, firefox on my PC . Have seen the same problem in chrome as well more frequently lately. Haven't tested on a mac yet.
In Charlotte NC viewing #slnolsummit webcast! Hi to & all!
lol it sounds weird like that
#sdusd board getting pretty sobering presentation on the process of state takeover in the event they can't balance the district's budget
I need your love to pull me up- i can't swim on my own- it's to much <3 - ily big dylan & Dalton. (:
#cody what's the craziest thing a fan has done on tour? (;
glad to see you are still doing your civic duty.
woaah I'm not a bitch! Haha and I wasn't. Duncan retweeted it. It's kinds cool to see my fb status go viral over twitter
Chandler man shoots aggressive dog to save his own Chandler police said the man was forced to shoot an American Bulldog that attacked his
Art Directors Guild ‏ | Let us know what you think of the production design in The Avengers! #ADG RT ( #Awesomesauce )
now she wana photo, you already know tho, you only live once that's that motto yolo
Bed is calling, but so is one more episode of Game of Thrones.
I'm more offended by that jacket!
I nearly sprayed my monitors with a mouthful of coffee re: that last tweet. Good one.
Glad that Charles Scott and PCOG team are OK in Joplin--let us join in praying for all those devastated by this storm.
I hate how Sportscenter talks about Amare's hand for 30 min and the entire NHL playoffs for 30 seconds
Santonio can you see this turning into a QB controversy? "No. No I don't." insists Sanchez is the starter.
anonymus D: ok no e.e
Customer service can't find you in the system. Pls DM me with email address or case # or full name.
More cold weather to come. Sale continues on fall and winter merchandise.
It crazy how that one text can change the feelings you have for that person. . . .
It's madness, love! Broken windows at Niketown, the courthouse and American Apparel. Fires being set, rioting...
I like it moved here in 2006...how is Cali?
#WaysToBeginSex Argue first!
"You have but one choice... the ring must be destroyed." All his lines in that scene could be the scene-button. All of em.
Win tickets to our midnight showing of The Hunger Games at Baxter 8 Theater's coming up with the Interactive 8 at 8!
because I am totally against that...
My partner is my wonderful husband... been married 29½ years. :) He loves it when I cook
take yo wife... give her back... 9 months after that... SIMILAC!!!
hey.... at least i tried ;) and it was more truthful ;D maybe even an understatement
New icon everybody!!!!
The Roots may be the most consistent artist in hip hop. They do not drop bad music.
mind your P's and Q's if you expect to get
It's spring!! My favourite season of the year, let the sun rise!! Xx
When you've got your breath inside your hands, everyday's a second chance
u home today?
can we get a shout out for an amazing singer/songwriter, #levilowrey? It would mean so much to me =)
Accepted. Email me deets () or message me here!
RT You can help us save kids before they up the doses. Looking for some role models and stars. No judgments. All good PR
For life? hahahah :D
He said if I want em "2 take care of me". I said "no cus my whole body hurts. An I don't want u 2 get it"
I hear ya, bought to start my next chapter :) let's catch up soon!
cool im 16. Im marie u?
I caught on to that ;))
I'll talk to the boss. He's a hardass tho
I'm falling to pieces.
Thanks for raising a nerd boy that traveled the world and made a few people's world a little better. You are a great woman.
NYC Mayor Michael Bloomberg isn't a Democrat.
I hear you lol! It's just the way weekends are made of
actually "Til the break of dawn!" *drops * xD
A 70+ degree weekend in Seattle feels like Christmas to me. Makes sense!
MVP: Phillip Rivers, (Superbowl and The Whole NFL.) Offensive man: Phillip Rivers, Defensive man: Vince Wilfork.
I had a raw kale and collard salad last night.
Re: Vince Young. Seems that way. RT : If it happened you gotta think we'd have heard it by now
Thanks for the tip about Utah beers. You are right, there are some great choices. My fave - Polygamy Porter.
": -- the Thai wrap is addictive. Mostly due to the amazing in my peanut" you all rock!
Argh, too much good stuff at #ASJA ! missing online markets w to hear food/nutrition editors including
OPEN MIC WITH MIKE MOLINARO AT 9PM 's Tavern! Check out our .com for more of tonight's specials events this weekend!
aye movies tonight!!!
got hw, bye
Thanks again to the Milwaukee Pizza Tour! It was a crazy night but we live having you!!!
I wish someday that it would be possible to claim all of the student loan interest and not just 2500$ cap on the federal form!
Thanks for the follow !
Some mistakes are too much fun to make only once.
Woo I got told my hair is getting long today :D this makes me happy..
I should have new profile pic(:
The primary property of intuitive design is clear focus. -
I feel bad that wagner has to read this piece of shit.. actually I dont feel bad, not at all.
why is she a nightmare?
Harriet Fulbright College offers an versatile array of exciting classes including our ESL for Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing students
A bit of a mess in the bottom of the eighth. Crim and Plesac combine to allow one run on two hits, an error and a walk. 10-8 Brewers.
Absolutely! Throw them a curve! and a left and a right! Keep 'em confused but not so much that they forget to feed us. :o)
What was the lick?
I then went and sobbed quietly in a corner... then had more ice cream
good point. It is the devils, after all
Letss get drunk
OmG HAHAHAHA i love stephanie!!
Watching tha Heat game
I love cheap nail polish. Why? Because it is cheap and it is nail polish.
thinly slice sweet potato, sprinkle salt / touch of olive oil, broil in oven til crisp but not burned
Always fun to stand helplessly with your colleagues while golf ball sized hail pounds your cars.
the usual Monday with
No doubt!
How you feel on the inside reflects how you look on the outside and vise versa.
Session done! Great class too -- although sitting thru a 30 min. summary of library services must feels like speed-eating a bowl of pasta.
Romans, notorious party animals wore wreaths of CELERY stalk to protect them from hangovers,which may explain celery sticks in Bloody Marys.
No Liquor 4 me 2nite! I'm gonna keep it plain n simple with ... Uumm ... Uhra uumm ... Yeah, I'll probably drink Liquor 2nite :-)
Thanks for the follow
nice one! keep up the good work.
to be honest, I barely ever read him anymore he could have changed it I wouldn't even know.
What sort of work would you be looking for? Have a friend who just moved back to Boston from Chi, she may have some ideas!
Training instructor has a line of 4 red bulls and a Starbucks espresso drink, said it's his job to be strung out for training
Great time catching up with this afternoon! Coulda spent the rest of the day hanging and chatting.
Where'd yah get them from?
New rule: If you start the email with "I hope you've been well," I will delete it without reading it.
You can't feel good about yourself when your making someone else feel bad. (life class with OWN last night!)
Hey I'm Jocelyn from DESA in 6 grade and let me tell you ,that day you came was fun and sum of us fell in love with poetry
Today we mark the one and only time in history that a completely innocent man died. And thank God he did, voluntarily.
I love the idea of a bulletin board. Looking forward to seeing how you use it!
well u can't, but play hard or hardly work, hahaha
I still cant get over when Devin said "Ah! I forgot my cigarettes!" i was dying laughing. Boy SIT tf down somewhere. He's a Unk !
omw to chill with my bestie . Where you work again ?
if you were LA local radio guy, how would you handle Artest talkers today?
Did you go to Cornel West? I was sick. :(
RT A big "Thank you" for #follow You can also #follow me Thanks again
you're doing a fanfic? :)
Surely watching Downton Abbey will help me finish this homework, right? Right?
Please give a SHOUTOUT<3 and follow 
Haha I take that as a huge compliment - Samantha was my fave & am very thankful I don't look like Will Ferrell :)
“: Since 1945 , the United States has attempted to overthrow more than 50 foreign governments.”
Strawberry daiquiris...🍓
if you want me to follow back tell your friends to follow me so i can get off of this following limit its irritating me ugh!
Lil Boys Who Aint Grown Yet..
where r u
I got beats for you!
this place just went bananas
Worried that #Santorum will take this thing. Libs forget that a religious conservative can rally millions of people who don't believe in TV.
": Idk what I would do w/o my dad."
going to bed soon. Good Night x
Thought for the Day - "You can’t build a reputation on what you’re going to do." - Henry Ford
Hair, like Gia's.
wow friend! i love your picture! lets go
do you have any work I could see?
Random acts of kindness to your neighbor = service = love = a better world to live in.
Working out every morning has been great, but do you find yourself hungry all day? Raw almonds n lots of water seem to help.
knock em dead! :)
Hot yoga soon-- it is a real ass-kicking but totally worth it. More men should do it.
Yes--Crown was years ago! Hope you're doing well--looks like you're busy w/ good writing gigs!
Learn from your mistakes and move forward! Bring your dreams into reality through action steps. Take steps daily to manifest your dreams!
“: Pay attention to them niggaz That you cool with & keep yo eyes on dem bitches that you claim you threw with”
If shes buying Ill take mine delivered to Mass & AlabamaRT : I'd it's a coworker then they are buying!
RT in Galveston Hooters, the balinese room and murdoch are gone. All piers on Seawall are gone, except flagship and 91st street
True story. “: When someone loves you, they don't always have to say it. You can always know it by the way they treat you.”
Would be nice to get some late night turkey dick
Portland traffic... :-/
When are you building that list management app? Building a new list SUCKS!
I have a client that needs pr and promotional help here in ny. Steve
mayne bout to start this cafe mom and im a dude lol
Hello VA! Its a beautiful day...
nice... Welcome back!
they definitely are
I am wise and #confident in all matters. I approve of myself 100%. I ask for help when I need it. I believe in myself.
Ever run sound & your out of 9 volt batteries for the wireless, so gather your old batteries & friends manually juice check them, sound fun?
Nothing puts me in a better mood than getting ready for the day with 's album blasting through my speakers.
I'm beautiful now that I'm with you <3 ( ü )
Sprint investigating reports of slow iPhone 4S data speeds Sprint Nextel ( NYSE:S ) is investigating reports that some Apple ( NASDAQ:AAP
I'm down with pasta here too. Just let me know.
Being a kid with a lot of money beats a broke ass adult any day
Growth as a professional= input Data in front of a computer for about 10hrs. I do it all for the kids! Children are our future.
Via We just finished up our Free Black Spectacles day at the University of Illinois at Chicago....
#ThingsThatIWantToHappen my mom to walk :)
I hate fags
I'll be hanging about on Twitter tonight from 7 to 730 ET to answer any questions from Accent Instructors re www.800-language.com workshops.
not good at all for the C's
What great praise - thank you! RT : Doing the most for our youth-Proud the PDX community benefits from your work!
Sometimes that mountain you've been climbing is just a grain of sand.
it's one of the best gifts he ever gave.
With game 1 officially over WMP is escorted by Police back to the hotel!
Need a new phone; iphone, galaxy etc.... Gotta decide
Spurs all about "we" not "me"
Me: Mom, can I buy this? Mom: No. Me: I have my own money though. Mom: No.
Thx & Happy Hump Day to u too!!
Al-Marzooq: not a single senior member of govt brought to justice
tapin out ugh
likewise. Where have you been?
does it involve a snuggie and a cup of milk
k see ya later!!! Lol bye
It's most important, that you're ok. #perspective man I hate these car things...... sorry :(
conducting research w/all partners to find out abt circ, costs, and sustainability for all parties
Back to the real world
We're almost there! We've got waterproofed iphones kicking around the office, we're just not quite full scale ready yet.
I wanna go to zuma
I'm quickly realizing there is a thing as "too much coffee" - don't mind me, just can't stop shaking & having minor heart palpitations
I might hang out with Jakob tomorrow haha
#Wiunion #Wisconsin The power the wealthy collect is self destruction; a business can't stand without demand. We, the people, are the union.
i got caught up with finals but ima send over an email this week with some tunes attached to see if you like any
I fuckin love avengers! :) "im always angry"
at least you wont get tasered if you mix bacon and cobbler.
Thank You <3 Then it's still my b-day over there then hehe
thanks for the follow girl!
#ICANN & IP: 1-sided misinformation, tortured metaphors, half-truths, grand-standing, rhetoric, threats - it must be congressional testimony
I'll be checking out and tomorrow due to the meetup plug by
#TheFirstSongIHeardBy Kid Ink What I Do
thanks, little buddy.
that's me(;
Has anyone used member.ly?
(cont) for 2 minutes. He gets 20 tries.
The fact I get a 68% on a yet and my grade goes up 5% . >>>>
Quote: "I liked that title. I didn't want to lose it, but if I had to, I'm glad I lost to you. You're gonna be a champ." —Jersey Joe Walcott
If your about something and you have a love for music support the movement and
stepping out of the serato control vinyl realm?
And 'frisco' and 'Cali' RT Dear guy who says "Cap Hill," "San Fran," and "Philly" in one sentence-are you THAT busy?
Stick to writing and let the front office and coaching staff do their job. Damn we all miss Bernardo Fallas
What's an elevator pitch
Bingo Players tonight ! Steve Aoki killed it as USUAL!! Don't miss out on one epic night!
Life's like an hourglass glued to the table.
my bro gets in from nicaragua tonight! can't wait to see him. and neither can the pups.
you suck -_-
lmao im sure she wont care shes got millions of guys out there after her oh nd u. I would pik u over JB ANYY DAY F that kid lol
cats turtles irishness mirrors carrots
Had a great time now we're 's with all the...Bruins fans wah wah. Soprano gonna take your forward any day
My Father had a profound influence on me. He was a lunatic.
WOW. Sucks. Brenton won't take you guys?
Finally seeing the avengers!
The Indians and Jays are scoreless heading into the bottom of the 4th
hey.iwanna see your hair?dm me!!
I did not want to get up this morning... it is cloudy and raining. I think I need extra coffee :-)
fun stuff coming up the rest of the week!
Why have we not heard about this before now???
SEAHAWKS will b in some high-scoring affairs this season - HOUSH arrival coupled lame backfield & aging "D" means it's time for
I be Tumbln like a muthafucka
Hahha RT : wow...once again steve blake is demonstrating his inability to guard ANYONE....
Working tonight cuz prom is gonna make me broke
i aint seen dis movie in years i loove love love carlitoss way so im out
I pretend to like 80% of the people I know
Rameriz his second hit today. I think his average might be above .100 now.
Very excited to catch up with the old #BSU PR Crew over sushi and drinks tonight! Good eats, good times and most importantly, good friends.
Its stuck in my head...And no I am not kidding about the money.
Thanks for following buddy!
“: So I downloaded #FCPX wow, this might take some getting used to. Interesting.” havent even bothered
If I ran the ball 10 times against a pro defense I'd have the ball stripped probably 9 times.
I Followed Her Already!(:
I can't wait to get married ^_^
They say patience is a virtue. I'm driving myself crazy in waiting.
Let's be honest, I'll be singing "one percent reason you'll remember oUR name" all day long... I may even break out into dance.
Possibly. I'll wait a couple days. But remember, I was overcharged *twice*. I have one credit showing up.
Is anyone else super crazy curious about their future? I know I am!
good luck with Duke today though - have fun with that ;)
Products sound gr8! Want to learn more... do u offer samples to try out?
“: At Axum supporting and Come out and support!” great hanging man!!
My wife is laughing her ass off at a video of horse dressage (dancing). This is why we get along so well.
starting from the beginnig though so I hope to catch up in the next couple of months or so! Listen to one/two a day.
Thanks. I've tried some of those, but it's just not the same. Sigh.
Big show fired?
I wouldn't mind if you were one of the 72 Virginians either.
Hello my people!!
Well of course!! Best of luck to you and everyone on rehearsal and shows! :)
That's awesome! I didn't know he was a good guy!
Seeing that I got a text and get excited because I think it's from you & it's from someone else :(
Anyone know how the snow is these days at Whistler?
lol when I said home, I meant Dallas. Won't be in the Chi till July.
#vpearl6 how best to gather a range of people to throw their support behind a common effort? This can drive a new appreciation of our world
So I found out can come to parties but I wonder if you can pay extra for to come too :)
She likes to play around.
Now That Was A Stupid Question...
so when u going to give me a taste!?")
Downloaded the Minecraft trial. I'll give it a chance.
What are you behind on, maybe I can fill you in
get off my QB!
www.meetup.com/lunch-in-lodo Join us for Lunch this Friday at Samba Room- Great Networking!!!
#NowPlaying Your Favorite Hero – Killer On the Lower East Side
RT : Did I just read that Simon Borg -------- Spurs are not as high up on pecking order of world football as you might think.
I love Chipolte, even if I can't spell it rite LOL
Sunday Gravy has never been better specially with four pairs of fake titties to help out with the ambience
RT : 'If you're not failing every now and again, it's a sign you're not doing anything very innovative.' -Woody Allen
Prenatal tests are medical services that saves the life of mom &baby not a moral aptitude test.
dropped at the job and went to the bank, now off to sort and wash laundry... another productive monday :)))
C:\Users\Cathy\Documents\Cornerstone\Website\Doc1.mht
When do I get those Twinkies? I have only been waiting since like 3rd grade...
Oh man. I just had the best best best super-secret idea.
Very successful day :)
Think of the qualities of your best teacher? Your worst teacher?
Restrooms available RT : Going to hear Nathan Englander and Etgar Keret speak at #DCJCC, may pee myself from excitement
your size in_____?
Every child is an artist. The problem is how to remain an artist once we grow up
New co-op missions every week or two ... like a TV show you play. It's not DLC. It doesn't cost anything.
Text from the President: "John Travolta is here....very...VERY excited about my announcement on gay marriage....VERY...excited..."
this man has to have the hairiest hands in the midwest.
my day just got ten times bettterrrrr(:
Pierce doing his best "Bruce Banner gets Angry" impression.
haha, i woke up from my name just in time for SWAC. xD
my girl asked me what would I change about her if I could change one thing. I said "I'd change her into J Lo" and she got mad!
Kendrick Lamar is one of the dopest rappers out. Perfect blend of intelligent rhymes and style. Most rappers are one or the other.
follow back please ?:)
First Kick! KSMO! Now!
lol RT RT “: We're experiencing technical issues. Thanks for your patience!” <-- zuckerberg's takeover!! 👎
Alien invaders in the intestines!
Whats Up with Tiger Woods? Follow me. Why struggling w/consistency? Check for my blog before Tiger tees off on Saturday!
Jon Bones Jones!!!!
#21stME is twenty first century museum education.
oh gosh o.o lol
send you an email about it w a URL for a sneak preview...
perfect timing right when i get back from kansas lol ask ur mommy if u can come visit me!
Been craving Maggiano's for like 2 months now... It's time.
Such a wonderful time with Hebron Church this morning in Pittsburgh! Thank you so much for having me - loved being with you. :)
Haha uh oh
Hi Sandra, if you want to support Charity Water this holiday season, you can! With the pungle.me app. Check it out.
Silent Prayer
Maybe playing FarmVille all day and giving back your stock options isn't all that appealing after all?
Time for schooll
You should follow if you know your own name
I'm gonna come by to grab those dvds if ya got em
Mixtape title ideas: 'Berna Fide Pro' 'Turn Up: Drunk in the AM' and an r&b title for the ladies: 'Feel the Bern'
even worst lol and yeah family is good guess won't be bad then...but powerful connections oh la la
it's supposed to smell like apples ;o
“: Now joined to a gym #Teamfitness Hehe” do work
Can't wait to get back to Austin to see !!
Heading 2 Lawrence, with the boy to kick off the Futbol season. Tourney starts @ 8 am Saturday.
That was a super great message this morning!
: just one of the great lines in that movie!
I hope tomorrow is as pretty as it is today!
“There are no ordinary moments. There is always something going on.” – Peaceful Warrior
RT : I can't move.
I don't get it
hey!!!! Is hilarious, why don't you be yourself and say
Thanks to the CLA, Budget Committee has an additional $16M to work with. Time to talk about layoffs?
Now you can be catchin feelings baby cause were goin steady.(:
At Ruby Tuesday ^.^
hey babe how r u ? Will be there soon.. Just got back from Holland and now in vegas..
Now a days. I love you means nothing. It's over said. Smh
if I am not mistaken that came from lion kimbros notebook! Cool
Boys like you love me forever.
It was great meeting you and RaeAnn tonight I am already putting my FB tips to good use
"If the people remain right, your public men can never betray you." #quote From "Abraham Lincoln: Quotes, Quips, and Speeches," p. 55.
good morning <3
Difficult, almost impossible, to win when you are missing support.
Gross! I'll pass.
Early literacy: if there's a big mess, a lot of learning was going on
Good start, lets hope the American people are smart enough to give you a chance to do more
"I know why the caged bird smokes"
"Arenas: No. People come up to me and have a conversation with me, especially at the YMCA, where I do spin class in the mornings."
RT : Just heard someone AGAIN say "#WCM & #Portals are starting to converge". Really?! Um, this trend started 10 yrs ago.
With the uncertainty about the future of small businesses and what the government will do next, it takes hard work, and a success...
Cat Fact: Sir Isaac Newton, not only theorized the principles of gravity, he also invented the cat door
Hahahahaha gotcha! Love you too!:)
Signed with new agent. Good day.
fingers crossed she sticks to puppies and doesn't have children!
do people still use to plan their travel these days?
Its shameful how many tweeters don't realize the POSITIVE impact Planned Parenthood has for women who need it for healthcare
or I should say is flying by lol
when someone asks to take your work home to copy, then they lose it. omg. you're never copying me ever again. K!!!
The pregame drinking for #Buzzcation has begun
Honey <3 I'll tweet u soon cause I'll be offline these days :(( <3
Talking with simone presents inc from atlanta cheers amy
Awesome round for
got em. keep the change.
OMG, the women coming into the Marina Del Rey Starbucks are AWEsome. You'd think there was a model convention nearby.
I challenge you to be dreamers; I challenge you to be doers and let us make the greatest place in the world even better
whatever makes you happy...you win:/
I love you, Justin !
How do vampire football players get the mud off? They all get in the bat-tub.
marathon!!! yeah <3
Nothing is impossible, the word itself says 'I'm possible'! Audrey Hepburn
Welcome to Twitter, !
Hard rock cafe Hollywood
Those who can't forget are worse off than those who can't remember
oh tweet him and say check ur DM's
who's the culprit LIRR or NJT
Hey! A democrat won an election! Isn't this the first time since like... 2008?
As told me a few years ago....keep it classy 24/7. Aiming for 1% improvement in all aspects of life everyday.
Hey everyone(:
Hooray! We can't WAIT!
Hope that everyone is enjoying this Thanksgiving day! Take a moment to reflect on for what you are thankful.
in Pass conference at orange county. Douglas Barrett rocks! Agile data warehousing with parallel SQL support
Tonight! Earplane : LATIN - BRAZILIAN JAZZ 8:00PM Peter Kienle - Guitar, Tom Clark - Sax, Neil Heidler - Bass, Lawrence Clark - Drums
I just want to say I love warm weather because these ladies be looking good:-)
Bill, why do you tempt us with lizard links? why? share!
good night :)
Just saw the Traber Mazzio's commercial. I'm confused. The goal for advertisements is to sell products, right?
That was too much Nicki!
I think I'm stuck in the past.
But yeah the weekend you come, I'm back on my club flow.. Let me know when to start collecting bottles
Bright Eyes can get me through any kind of day
If a guy ever tried to control me he would never see the light of day again
If you were a radio personality... What would you name your show, & what type of music you'd play, join our FB convo at on.fb.me/w496Q2
This beautiful weather calls for drinks and !!! Come down to the #firestonedistrict for Sunday funday!!!
“: One way to increase your chances of a goodnight kiss: Getting your date home without a drunk-driving crash. #ThingsWomenWant” Bravo!
“: It's never an easy win you know never a smear lol” // ;D
Praying so hard that my grade turn into a c in math ugh
you know that's right! Cohen had a VERY rough early evening:(
I am so happy that Cory came to support my team and i at our last home game of the varsity bball season :)
I saw him today...and his legs >w<
I want a cotton candy machine! :D 💚
I'm homeschooled now cause kids were being really rude and immature
I'd never let you go
The International Calls are coming in form around the world. Singapore, United Kingdom, Argentina, Bahamas, Chile, Costa Rica, Brazil,
rule of thumb...if you've been to an iteen foam party within the past year, odds are you aren't prepared to raise a child
Would you be interested in attending and Oscars Party if we had one at The Spot?
Excited about book award announcements coming up: NBCC nominees tonight and Newbery, Caldecott awards Monday a.m.
Visited Rockman exhibit last week. Loved his 'Evolution' mural!
the enforcement tactics are creating not only impoverished fathers, but creating poor minority children with negative ROI.WHY?
Hello Mel!
When you sang "It was 94 and you had to change your ways" In #TurnToYou My mom and I began to cry #1994 is my birthyear! 😭💜
Drop #2...r u f in serious
My feet are swollen :(
Can't wait to show off our designers' creations at 's Art In Bloom this weekend!!
On that note. . .how the hell does one make coffee tastes like cigarettes???
Though my blood runs cold to think on it, if it be my destiny, I will rent a Zipcar and drive to Newton. For the good of the archives.
wow u happy
With Freese sitting 2-0 and runners at corners with 0 outs, I think we all knew the game would end that way.
Less than a week away from Hollywood Alley, great local bands and cheap beer, you can't go wrong, see you Saturday!
Fancy grilled cheese just got fancier as adds toastabags to their delivery service to keep your sammies nice & toasty!
"and I don't like it...read why" Not a very well thought out schedule. Conference championships 3 days after semis end is nuts.
If uses 'gamechanger' in reference to any more of his tweets, he is disqualified.
You can now follow Rock Snubs on Twitter! Follow user
Smart stuff: RT : "You can't get ahead of anyone if you're always trying to get even with them."
Daylight Saving time is like telling someone "you would be taller if you cut your head off and stood on it"
Good shii RT : Watching "How I made my millions" on cnbc... Interesting
golf tourney. Brought my giant toothbrush for a putter.
You can follow the tweets of our awesome tour developer, guide, and unofficial historian, TOM DAVIS, here:
are going to take down the today
Feral cats are responsible for about 82% of kittens born in the U.S. annually, putting great strain on the shelter system.
#Pens have been down is series 3-1 before & come back to win, but they never got to the point of down 3-1 by losing the 1st 3 games & won.
that photo of & is so precious! <333
Damn babe drop her phone in some water all bad
Looking forward to the Sacramento Archives Crawl today. Our first stop will be at the Sacramento Room at
I was either spammed or last night I was going through my Nature Boy Ric Flair moments
Not at Microsoft anymore, at a startup company called WebServius (API management infrastruct. as a service), it's still very small
Reply: omg iloveyoujustinn!
BOUNCE BOUNCE So and are frakkin' rockstars Demo of archive server up and working launchpad.net/citability
So annoyed.
I need coffee. Ten minutes til there's a pumpkin spiced latte in my hands
we can guess, Josh, but u gotta admit that Glantz's BB A7 was not one of his better plays vs Phil given raise size & stcks, etc
Picnic lunch at Crissy Field w family and friends today. Pretty nice way to break up the work day!
Happy New Year. Bye 2011.. welcome 2012
Directioner: i finally got 1D tickets maybe niall will see me!! *excited* Me: Bitch please hes mine!! :)
Ashleigh Ashton, Wednesday Knight & Kaleigh Wood make their sister act debut tonight at the wine studio!
In other news, Kerry Wood has an ERA of 14.54.
but he is old and married!
Oh what a lucky man he was!
they won't call me back either!! I texted you!!! :) <3
U haha why not?
Having second thoughts about telling you how I feel..
ohh that's depending on who you're talking to... and wether or not they've got a gf or significant other. :P
U know what im gonna do to get more women followers ima just put a famous person's abs on my main picture maybe its a good idea or bad idea
email sent! [heart]
The official studio for is expected to open July 2011.
I really loved CODE NAME VERITY by Elizabeth Wein - WWII 2 young women who work for the British cause, one captured by Nazis
I'm up packing for the 81th Anniversary Conference in Columbia, SC.
eat some cheese! :)
#ff to our awesome partners for tonight's #Unblurred:
It was ugly. A win is always a good thing #gobrewers Nice job!
good job; you're making me feel lazy, man!
How do you feel about comments made about ? That as a SAHM she has "actually never worked a day in her life".
We're so excited! It's going to be a fun night. (and weekend) Wish you could be here.
isn't iceland in financial ruin right now? Perhaps that is the best time to go....
Never let your "enemy" make your policy choices.
i refuse to complain about the blazing, sweltering, smothering, soul-destroying heat.
See you this Wednesday at 'Voices: Perspectives of Women in Medicine' from 12-1PM at the Biomed research commons
LMAO! “: Saturday is a great day for running errands & recording in a little book all the people who pissed you off this week.”
People don't change, they just become a clearer version of who they really are.
XD thanks for the support you are the reason why i draw :)
RT City of #ABQ Thank u for using 311 We appreciate your tweets and are here for all your city government requests and concerns.
I also still find the irony that Joey fatone's name is "fat one", AND I feel bad for the guy w/the deep voice in Boyz to Men. He only talks
Gerrymandering is legal & encouraged by law but it is one of the most undemocratic notions ever invented.
I could pull it off probably
That was YOU??? I told my kid to do it. I thought that was a good-nasty look, though, not bad-nasty. ;)
In such a bad mood that I feel like punching the next person that talks to me!
I love
RT : Dear , I promise to get drunk at your wedding and fall in the cake.
Always. More. Sergio!
's first Women in Business Conference is today + speaker series with #LauraEvans! It's going to be a great day, we hope to see you!
Just casually met the guy who plays Peter Pan at Disneyworld when I was out walking the dog...
RT if you love this guy that lived in San Antonio, TX, but now lives in Miami, FL.<3
you entering!? I'm jealous!
Have you liked This Restaurant yet? $150,000.00 makeover to the winning restaurant.
you are welcome!! Follow me please!! I watched #boyfriend 25 times i am really
Ok, I'm clowning now but seriously Chicago is that deal. I love her dearly and I promise to never do her wrong. She's been too good to me
I don't know why it didn't occur to me that you would be there! Duh
#GiveObamaCreditFor... paying off hookers in Latin America AFTER they went to the news media.
Thinking Rinaldo probably is in the press box next game
SAVE THE DATE: April 17 Luncheon. Jay Friedman, author of 30 Days to Digital Media Expertise will discuss "Doing Digital Media Right."
naw....gave it to ur mom a month or so ago 85.00 dollars NEPHEW
Why don't people "get" that closing loopholes will generate more revenue... just like raising taxes?
It hurts saying these things because you think you'll get hurt but it's just hurting....
Saturday is the sneakpeak just4 ! U have2 follow Buggy 4the next taste! We r officially on the streets this summer!
My fancy pants shoes are evil!
. How many innocents have been put to death? BAN THE DEATH PENALTY! The system is NOT perfect!
Braden holtby is the best goalie in the playoffs right now
Can't wait to take my medicine!! In the mean time handling this bipolar fever >__<
was Rachel around? ;) lol
nun laying in my bed ,txtin friends trying to go places and watchin bad girls
you are amazing Samuel <3
will be announcing the postcard contest winner soon!
haley freaking baker . ( ;
I sent a hologram of myself to work today. Hopefully no one saw through my deception.
I swear my short-term memory is entirely trained to remember what I control-C'd twenty minutes ago.
safe travels luv. See you soon.
Damn we watching all the good movies tonight.
lol!! Yeah normally I would, but I have a BUSY morning!
And it's all I've ever known. When I'm in Washington, I'm at a loss. Usually friend(s) do that for me.
cant wait for torr beating that ass
“: Wicked spot for those Do-Over parties!" stay tuned for the next one!
"Break Up" is one of my favorite albums. Always on the top of my playlist!
but that just keeps me on my ass more lol ;)
oh thank you!!! :) and best of luck!
RT : What about Ty Law or other free agent DB's getting a look this week?
Brilliant show last night at the Crofoot!
my location consists: anywhere there is WiFi..
just saw that you're w/ Outside now. Congrats on the fancy new title.
Camp Pendleton Marine's home searched and wife questioned in dissappearance of Fallbrook woman.
Woke up earlier this morning to the sound of bagpipes. Downtown San Diego is always full of surprises! Happy St. Patrick's Day everybody!
MY THOUGHTS.....I THINK KIDS SHOULD BE ABLE TO GO PRO SRAIGHT FROM COLLEGE. MUST STAY 2 YEARS IF COLLEGE
SOX vs CUBS...CUBS about to get the goo goo gaa gaa beat outta them..lol.
Keep going back on colors to paint my room!! Decisions
Oh god, animal cages...I'm going to freak if there's reptiles!
Content Marketing: Online is the New Skyline
Q: What happens if you cross a midget and a computer?A: You get a short circut.
My wrist is all fucked up today.... guess I don't have to run any food tonight! Like I would anyway.
lol ya my bad forgot to reply! I took quintanilla & willem's 18th/19th cent. Q's much more fun lol but both challenging profs
lmafo!!! You look like that roach after Jake killed it!!
don't care haha
Movie night! ((:
haha! Well you learned something new everyday...yup! Lmao. Are you from Chicago or you're traveling to Chicago to see 1D?
Looking forward to this event! A Conversation with President Amy Gutmann at Alumni Weekend 2012
Uploading a new video!
Good practice Rage. Welcome to the new players and welcome back to some old faces. Keep getting better every practice
very soon! You get some friends of yours together and we will go
What I object to is negative utopias. RT : and you say you dislike him RT : Kurt Vonnegut briefly worked for SI.
Trying to tell Keith, thanks and I'll keep it real too. XOXO
Damn i got along way to go.
So happy #elf is on USA right now!!
yes ma'am! I'll be back in Huntsville at the end of July!
THANKS for the sweet complement! I LOVE the Wolsey website...sweet eye candy!;)
Sometimes the only thing left to do is wrap your arms around each other one last time and then ... Let go!
hey Ariana! Love you :* hope you're having a great time in Florida and also celebrating mother's day with your family. :]
I need to work on a plan to clean up our data on an annual basis
Remember, we're closed today for Yom Kippur. Come by tomorrow to check out The Color of Memory!
i've been in my bed since 1pm i havent gotten up literally at all except for food is this what it feels like to be obese?
Why do I even come to Chicos.
How long is the gestation period of a Jessica Simpson? I just assumed it was the same as a warthog.
Thursday, make the painless please!
Can she cook?
the mailman berrying a gift... just received my very own copy of Genreflecting in the mail, yes I am a nerd!
Karen, pretentious dignity
Yes we do! RT : We need to help people make decision to invest in content
I'm watching...RT : We're watching. RT : #ThePitch starts now! Retweet if you're tuning in.” ^RL
": Good Morning World you are now rockin with the #Blessed" happy hump day!
jam to us!!
Celtics coach also admits they should've fouled Philly earlier than 14.4 seconds.
I meant 5 sorry
taking a self defense class today...better watch it! I might kick you in the magic triangle!!
so glad you could make it out Stephen!
Outdoor Bootcamp in Wauwatosa starting June 1st! Who wants in?
Be yourself, not who others want you to be.
The Guto likes to think he is sporting a 70's porn stash...but knows deep down he's just a creep with a mustache watching porn.
I hate it. She makes me soo mad al the timee!!!
kate is nutty put her in shadybrooke
Need any money? Send me your bank acct# & I'll wire it to you. ;)
Why does Justin have to pay actors for a video when he can just hire beliebers for free?
*shoulder and knee ": Cold weather makes my ancle hurt"
IML is that a booth?
not tonight Just hanging out with my sis. I just can't bring myself to change out of sweatpants. Lame I kno lol
You are so inspirational my prayers go out to you & your family xoxo stay strong <3 please follow back
Does the firm compensate for your rainmaking strengths? You are good at expanding relationships, does the firm pay a proliferation credit?
To be able to look back upon one's past life with satisfaction is to live twice. - Lord Acton
for the same reason that so many people focused on his birth certificate...its politics
Thank you! RT : Happy Birthday !! Hope you have a great day!
video instead of recording?
Every once in a while they have groupons for them at local med-spas. All my friends in Vegas get them like, once a month.
I hate when I run into somebody that knows me but I have no clue who they are lol. # ummyeawatupdoe
Staring a my iPhone in complete darkness, trying to figure out at what point I crossed over and became hooked on Twitter. LOL
I've given up, I've given up slowly. I'm blending in so you won't even know me.
I want to move on, but I can't.
I never knew running worked out her abs
Terry off, oh dear Chelski.
haha me too
In case you're looking for the Bulls game, it's started on Comcast Sportsnet+ channel 285.
Such a crazy busy week - lots of new listings! What sort of #housing are you looking for? I just may have it in my back pocket!
Your right about the Bucks trade, the more I find out the better it seems.
LOL! That's really pushing it, but I like the way u think! ;)
A rich warm tenderness to your peas
Photo Flashback: Gaelic Storm - who will be at the IAHC Saturday. www.theconcertstage.com/gaelic-storm2009.html
Shirtless pasta cooking has its risks.
watching old videos makes me happy and sad rarrrrrrrrrrrr
well, I find it offensive, but not as offensive as the stimulus package, ObamaCare, the economy, or $5T in new debt.
"Gabriel throws himself into the easiest chair. He shakes his head. He sneers."- NOW I ASK YOU
♥ Dear God, I pray for the cure of cancer. Amen. ♥ 93% WON'T Copy and Paste this, will YOU? ♥
miss you guys too! Hookah soon? #iPhones 💜
Damn that #acuransx is the truth I can see myself riding in that
#hastac2011 If we need more collaborative work, do we need to learn skills of translation between specializations? How?
Hey, go here.. www.twitter.com/history_repeats, www.myspace.com/historyrepeats,www.facebook.com/#/pages/History-Repeats/137814635494?ref=ts
Boating through the Inland Waterways of France - Travel Presentation Thursday at 7:30pm (presented by Neil & Joan Malling)
lookin damn fine already!!
Want to know if your daughter will be a good mother, then looks how she treats her mom
Zombies, zombies, and more gut eating, brain bashing killer zombies. Does that describe your unpublished novel. Perhaps we can publish it.
Goodnight everyone! !! Be safe out there! !! *muah!
you'll pass!!!
Abs are like tits on guys.
Cloth and Canvas grand opening is April 12th from 5-9…see you there.
I must say.....Peyton Manning is a CLASS ACT!
Our first business tweet! Looking forward to connecting with Indianapolis small businesses wanting to increase sales thru coupon marketing.
Still coming down from #minnewebcon high. Spontaneously laughing and crying. But happy-crying, y'know. Husband & cat taking it in stride.
it's not Friday? sheesh.
Racks on Racks on Racks!!! “: No lie no lie no lie”
Thank you! Happy Mother's Day too you also! Xoxo #FitMoms! RT : Happy Mother's day to you!
you look so hot over there plain on your phone.
Do you have hand cramps from episode 2 yet?
#edumooc getting ready to join the first live chat for the MOOC! will be interesting to see how many will be live online
Haha I'm outtie too! Craziness tonight tho! “: hell no. Too packed and I'm out.”
Massachusetts Ambassadors Welcome Companies New to the Commonwealth at Fourth Annual Corporate Welcome Reception
Love it when God interrupts sermon study. Full blown, one man worship session in the basement.
RT : Skype Launches a Dedicated Network for Teachers
Levi leer Mixtape release & Pastor Troy movie release TONIGHT!!!!! @ #PearlBistro Be there!!!
of course they r
My hubby's taking me to a play tonight! And based on a Jane Austen novel, no less! #datenight #myhubbyrocks cc
Wake yo lazy ass up !
Those are considered "nice" things?
Even when we not grinding... we still grinding
That's what I've heard...a bit of $ and pressure can cause a kid to want to please his parents.
yes, I like that idea! Also maybe lunch or drinks to discuss our progress?
If I just lived in water I'd be ok
so you tweeted 4 hours ago... any chance you could get back on and tweet a happy birthday?
STOP SHOOTIN' NEW YEARS REVOLUTION......LETS RESOLVE TO EVOLVE!!!
Blehhhhh work :p
I'm so self conscious...
Log On : www.discountdw.com . Get free upgrade from double pane glass to triple pane glass for all windows and patio doors
“: RT if you love cupcakes.”
when I'm bored I pierce my ears
Spurs/Clippers game boring.... Changing my channel don't wanna watch Blake Griffin dunk all nite
absolutely thanks
Thrilled and relieved that today's luncheon was a huge success. The speaker was amazing and the guests impressive!
They secretly wanna go, lol.
i mean dis world aint gone eva change daz y i keep my head up an my nutz let em hang
The plan was, to drink until the pains over. But what's worse, the pain or the hangover?
Thanks for the tip. I love the Book of the Month section. Just what I need to procrastinate on doing what I should be doing!
I'm really hoping a certain someone text, calls or even email me about his payments tomorrow. I don't want to bug his father about it.
: I don't think there's a pot big enough for a giraffe...may you can use a pool
The Cavs are ugly. Look cheap
Optimist at heart...Pessimist in person...Dose that mean my glass is full?
don't forget the vitamins, b. Vitamin b, b. Be on that d too. Fuck these nutrasweet ass rappers on that splenda shit son. Word.
He's awesome to and our kids! :) cc:
i need to invest in a ac.. being cooked alive...
Got to love this Lehigh/Duke game for a great cheer for the underdog. Great play guys.
When I tell someone theyll be "the first to know" Im lying, you guys will be first to know
Opening Day! It should be a National Holiday, IMO. Go #Padres!
making chicken soup
Mfs Always Got Something Negative To Say. Tf, Just Shut Yo Ass Up, Nobody Asked For Ur 27 Cents. Weak Ass Nigga.!
am I way out of the loop? Where are you moving?
cant take it no more
Really dont want to go to school today...
"My mind starts racing and my heart forgets to beat When you start to walk my way I forget where I am cant find words to say"
Feeling like a zombie today.
Good morning! ^-^
Hines Academy in Milwaukee CLOSED Tuesday-heating issues.
has his garage painted like an NHL goal because he is always driving straight to the net! Nice Work Kid!
hey I sent you an awesome bootleg of "Dynasty" on SoundCloud! Hope you will spin it!
My bestfriend is a superhero ;D <33
If you rely on your friends to make your decisions,
is the "kindle lighted cover" worth $60? i'd like a light for it, sure, but it's almost as expensive as the device itself...
yeah gurl. Ill see you, l8r :D
Ventura and Los Angeles jazz fans follow
I want a regular boy .
Final paper submitted!!
We're building out our Twitter community. Any suggestions for strong voices on Foster Care, Intergenerational Living or the Elderly?
The USA misses you!!
2 Strip lights for rim lights & the mola beauty dish worked great for fitness guru, William
i wear my heart of my sleeve
dude...is that the "Big Tree"?
Thank you for the tweet!
Tell people to follow me.(:
Incredibly cute that the redbirds won baseball's trophy thingy.
tyler thinks im such a fat ass i bet.
Bill Bishop's book The Big Sort foretold the severe divisions of opinion in U.S.
Friends left, now im bored again. Send me some good websites for fun
Is it just me, or has Raw been kinda weak? is a fucking hack, and all in all it's been a kinda dull show...
How many of you are walk-in ET's? How many of you have been inside an ET spaceship? How many of you are parents of hybrid, ET children?
Gave a talk on China. Really fun and gave me an opportunity to hand out brochures. Always selling!
The Silk Tie likes Chris! Ever choke anyone out in a ring with a tie? thesilktie.com
I just finished Chest , shoulder & triceps , it's my 5th week , It was really hard!!!
I just saw that you replied lol! Yes we definitely should have met up by now. What's your schedule like?
:-) thanks that made my night
Really need to spend some time at The Chrysler Museum. Soon. Anyone else been? What was your favorite thing there?
IMO they should share FOY. MT Perhaps this is a sign: Trey Burke & Cody Zeller share Big Ten's final Rookie of the Week award
where is that at?
Allegations of bias against gay jurors in a SD courtroom, Judge is "shocked" by a prosecutor's behavior.I'll have more 6pm
at the risk of sounding cheesy, seeing the scope of it all makes me misty-eyed. Just a little :)
Glad to see you guys working together. You both do great, great work.
monsieur Pierre
working on getting my mayorship back
you're off the air again!
Skrillex as the 100th greatest guitarist... nice move, Spin.
Jesus. You make me look like an armless stepchild.
CAYOOOOT. he was tall
- Hope you enjoyed!!!
strengthening, 44 years to grow strong, Kathy is going to pay a heavy price for doing this style of parenting. Danika is strict but
Every parent can benefit from signing up with They offer a great free service to track recalls on all your baby gear....
Really such a thought provoking question for me RT : Would you rather have a repin, like or comment on pinterest?
haha well drama has Been following me around but not in a bad way tho !!
deal. You're locked in
Company's coming at 4. Is that too late in the day to start mimosas?
$69 and some change! This may be the least Ive spent in Whole Foods and i think I have enough for the week! Used coupons and my own bags
thanks a lot, & also 4 'getting' my attn 2 visual design :)
you're right, there's another label for it but it's inappropriate
Does visibility ensue change? I'm not saying no, but the chain of [re]action must be traced, or we get
Brand new high school and Baptist church in Cedar Creek are now burning.
Wow Carol! That's more below the belt than my Mama Drippy Jugs' nipple rings!
Thanks! Sometimes add beets too :) RT : That looks SO good! Love the addition of carrot puree!
_yeager as well
RT : !! The pizza is magnifique!! RT : What is the best late night place to grab a bite to eat...
no who-ville party for you
Check me out Tweeps!! I got some new eyes & these fancy antenna's... & sure know how to make me feel manly
takin the firefighters exam today!! wish me luck
im advanced to.... im in 10th... lol
RT : Today, you're capable of anything. Don't you forget it.
Brand new weed , brand new high
Ooh, tell her congrats. Did her mexican friend become a statistic and get pregnant?
I really hope my visit to the emergency dentist today doesn't interfere with my drinking plans for tonight and the rest of the weekend.
Best of luck to Davis, Jones, Kidd-Gilchrist, Teague, and Lamb in the #NBA draft. Go Cats!
my home and native land : ), don't get there often enough.
Gotta love sunday funday!!!!
Keep your phone in your holster. No excuses! I'm serious dammit!
“: ABC has canceled Pan Am, GCB, Missing and The River. Details to come... #Upfronts” The bloodshed starts! No one is safe!!
Gearing up for a great week! Speeches in RHE101, Bush & Obama in Presidential, & the play THE MISER W-Th-F-Sa at 8pm at
Excuse me, while i kiss the sky. Do do doo.
“Sometimes I’m terrified of my heart; of its constant hunger for whatever it is it wants. The way it stops and starts.” ― Edgar Allan Poe
Needa get my own car so I can get up &d leave when I feel !
Ahh..very cool. Thanx for encouragement. We pride ourselves with real lawyers handling the documents, yet online convenience.
The New Orleans Swampers!
Man woke TF up with a huge bump on my face..
The Black Album is my favorite album by Jay-Z cold as hell :)
Happy birthday!
Dentist appiont...this is when i finally get all my complete braces on
Will do! And likewise with Jess et al!!
. . . Pair it with a pint of Rohrbach's. Vanilla Porter & Highland Lager are on special during Happy Hour today, Scotch Ale is...
sounds like something I need to get my hands on! Is it online or is it a book?
apparently we missed the corsette memo tonight
scoreboard where you at
Thank you, Madison! Go see THE AVENGERS if you haven't seen it yet!
Aw, I wish I was out there with you guys! Hope you're having fun (and being fabulous) at #RSAC :)
and lottes elbow...
nice meeting u last night!! Bravo;)
Let's go have a drink.
agreed. blue jeans is pretty nice. video too.
Most common lineup last year had Revere, Casilla, Mauer, Cuddy. Can't pay 2nd batter $23M.
Ew. Mom just asked if she wanted a pearl necklace. Luckily we are at target
Open All Week, New Years Eve Til 10pm, and New Years Day For Brunch. Come by and ring out 2011 with awesome specials, cocktails and friends
If anyone sees ask her what baby pigs sound like when they're getting picked up. Funniest thing of my life. #loveyoubabe 😂😉😘
Queen Latifah has beautiful hair!!!!!
oops! we'll fix.
Could you walk with me if I gave you my foot ?
lmao is it just you guys there
yes we are!!!!! Just want them to keep it up :)
An excited group of little girls are walking into their first Girl Scout meeting at Positive Tomorrows right now!
I know yeahh. They're just so adorable and funny! I love it XD
Photos are up. W.colonialsphotosByjen.shutterfly.com
Well done, Browns. Maybe you are turning things around. Maybe.
ive been hungry since 10... I know I need to eat something soon
Op Ivy avi. Instant follow.
Looking for a contractor in Metro #Milwaukee? Check-out 's Fall Home & Remodeling Show this weekend at State Fair Park!
Apologies for my recent lack of tweets. New job, visiting friends - I'm making an effort to get back in the Twitterverse ASAP!
Just got the second installment of Omar Daniel's new piece and it looks great! Can't wait to record it on sunday.
Hello chica!! How is Law school? What year is this for you?
im so happy now itunes is gettin fixed
cious to waste.
Okay! Want to have cute Alemily moments later? I need to watch TSC too, tonight. lol
can I wrap up and Team #GTTR and give Them as a gift for mothers day to my Mom
Genius, wish I'd thought of it RT Guess Bowlsby is more fitting B12 commish than Nationalchampionsby /
omg i seriously need to stop watching HGTV i just wanna buy a house!!
Sad to be missing #phillyETE this year.
“Innovation distinguishes between a leader and a follower.” RIP Steve Jobs
I'm so scared
lmao at wiz...radio dude:"so your not a pop rapper?" wiz:" ha yea im a pop rapper...i pop up and make 5 million"
still, really dope list nonetheless.
do u know where i can find more info about him friends ryan and chaz ? tnks a lot
Thanks Cindy. I've made it as far as Denver. :-)
Doritos Loco tacos >>>>
no worries; you're a natural.
I have enjoyed the series done by Coach Colson!
After skimming, I plan on reading more of your blog.
I can live without money, but I cannot live without love
how can you won when you only get 2 hits since the 2nd inning? Sorry, but White Sox pitchers are not that good.
OMG YOUR BRACES ARE COMING OFF IN 8 WEEKS! #YEE excited and upset :)
what exercise/food/health blogs do you follow? would love to know...
Congrats on being one of the most innovative events pros according to Biz Bash!
plzzzzzzzzz follow me!!!! :)
Last day at dowling for 9 months. I'm so excited.
So tell me why you tryin to ignore love in your life?
Oh no! Can we help?
Come see us in Newark! We're here 'til 5 today. No appt. necessary for optical. 100 High St. 315.331.5721. New patients get 30% off glasses
Love your show, hi Ruthie!
I'm gonna lay outside. Hopefully I get some color.. -_- too white.
If I was da heart of some of these ppl I would kick 1 of ur lungs everytime u didn't follow my lead bc I'm that part of u that knows God lol
oh yes I did! Give me a month & it will debut.
Oh wait, sidenote...we need to talk about Orlando lol.
"Midnight in Paris" now stands at $49.7 US, just shy of the $50 million mark! What a triumph!
DRINK SOMETHING THEN...THATS ALL WE NEED IS DEHYDRATION AND A HURT WRIST....
Please don't make me wait another year for cannoli!
The Knicks can no longer piss me off! Goin for the homeboy Durant. DMV stand up! Let's go OKC
Totally! It is hard to do. I love, love, love my stylist , her name is Mayleen. In case your up for a
Thanks bro! Good to be here.
I keep hoping that the next time Roger Goodell appears on stage, he comes along tap dancing.
do I really want to listen to all 24 CDs of Arguably by Christopher Hitchens? maybe someone can tell me which disks are best?
Hi, man, its been so busy. Hope everyone had a great weekend.
i don't see "you better pay him in rubles! Thomas robs the Russian!!" anywhere on my Jack Edwards Bingo sheet...do you?
has been working hard on a new special! Let Italian Steak Fridays begin!
Hey Bella I know that you met Keone Young my dad is friend with him :) :)
Also today on the show: #JonathanVilma sues #RogerGoodell, #NFL news and a weekend of #Marlins and #Yankees baseball.
I will b at the DETROIT LIONS game tomorrow! Let's get it Calvin Johnson!
Help students build a digital portfolio
Nobody who ever gave his best regretted it. - George Halas
put mckenry at first????
feel better soon, eat some seaweed!
I will be fascinated to hear all about what's going on… :)
#Dragonlaunch Watching the SpaceX launch. The next big step in US space exploration.
I have a twitter crush on and strongly recommend that y'all follow him. He puts the yay in mayor.
I Can Make A Good Aszx Lie Out Da Truth.,! I Hate Lying 2 Be Like So Nxxt Year
Thanks for following! Tell me more about your skincare products?
thank you! (:
I feel in abundance need to drive really really fast, it's probably about time to hide my keys
#ThankYou for the recommend! We are about the power of creative expression and how it creates a world of peace (via )
was the father of Jesse, father of David. 18This is the line of Perez: Perez begot Hezron, 19Hezron begot Ram, Ram begot #Torah 97/99
If you would like to submit art to be reviewed by Art Attacks please send a link to your work to .
Mine: within 5 min of saying team should learn cheers song live on air... They sang it on plane. Awesome.
The neighbors mad me mad. So I ran across the street & pee'd on their Sunday paper Will be interesting when they read it at the donut shop.
I want to see in Minneapolis on 5/20!
Any store or event with the words “Kountry” or “Kraft” in it is going to be painful.
Hoping the wifi signal in the conference hall is stronger than in my room
dru is making my twitter i feel special
So excited the spring is here and we had a mild winter. Looking forward to marchmadness, spring and summer tours. #furthur & #phish!!!!!!!!!
Who would win in a fight. The chick from Resident Evil vs. The chick from Underworld?
Four hour games every night
Audre Lorde~ Our feelings are our most genuine paths to knowledge.
If you were to die tomorrow, what would you differently today?
OK, the #VW #Passat commercial with the little kid in the shopping cart car? Too cute.
Lebron takes a seat like a spoiled lil NBA brat that he is. He expects all the calls
I would love to bed asleep right now. -__-
Tourists and locals alike scream for Lee’s Boston Cream Pie Cupcakes. If you’ve never had one, you gotta try one. Or two.
It's too eaaaaaaarrrrrrllllyyy.
When a guy gets out of the car and walks across the street to get away from his girlfriend while sitting at a stop light >
Looking forward to my brothers retirement party today at Scott AFB 20+ yrs in
This burrito from is good, but it sure is filling.
Good ears RT : Song that's stuck in my head now? It's #1 on iTunes - Fun. "We Are Young"... reminds me of a memory.
All right, with that play, I think Bryce Harper and the Nationals are officially can't miss television. Wow
Unnerving toddler quote of the day: "Sara, bring me a knife!"
Rest in peace Adam "MCA" Yauch. You'll be greatly missed! Thank you for all of the great memories and great music.
Oh, baby why do ido that to you?
“: Just think what you do with putting junk and box together." haha
m that sounds fun
I feel like all my problems were toppled on-top of each other and recklessly knocked over....
you are so right!!!!! PRICELESS!!!
I'm going to come to you're house & cut you're throat
But an article on archaic terms we still use to describe actions we no longer do is long overdue!
Happy birthday ! MOM :D :') special day ! <3 #happybirthdaypattie ! <3
I won't look back once i walk away
Time for bed! Work,then home in time for more hockey #nevergetsold Goodnight All!
So we know you just left here but now that you've had time to recover, you should so check us out!
famous last words
“: You're my bestfriend because i wouldnt dare to be this weird with anyone else.” <3
As Vonnegut said of book indexes in Cat's Cradle. Which reminds me - Ice 9 is the Web.
I'm working on that lol RT : you should write a book... Lol
who you telling? I'm on call Friday and Saturday this week & that's it -__-
It was absolutely epic to see Favorite New Country Star October 2010 presenting on the AMAs - They're going places kids!
yea its great I'm all about twitter these days anyway
just got homee... going shopping (:
According to Einstein, absolute truth depends upon one's view point. Correct, but how does one's point of view come to be?
also everyone, is our favorite person over at Gone Movie today. Thanks Sarah!
RT Laughter is the corrective force which prevents us from becoming cranks.~Henri Bergson
I accept
That's right! Watch or Sacramento!
SeaTac is the best and I know that Park-N-Ride of which you speak!? Can't wait to see you in Vegas in April!
“: #Leo needs a strong partner to help keep them in line.” yes cause I tend to be a bit crazy at times ☺
#HealthTip : The American Heart Association recommends eating Vitamin E rich foods to reduce the chances of developing heart disease.
The "article economy" has not materialized - Beebe.
Getting up early always makes me feel like more of an adult. Wish I had the motivation to do this everyday.
i can't take him seriously as a human.. he's just not very convincing.
Also there is a difference between respecting KU, and rooting for them. I respect them, they're a great team. Just another hoops game to me.
Yay! Thank you :-)
sorry I can't be there next Sunday but good luck w your soup!!
#ThatAwkwardMoment when the neighbor boys start singing Baby by Justin Bieber to you O_o
Survey time, please respond. How late do you drink coffee? Would you come in after six pm? Thanks for the feedback! Fresh Black Mamba NOW!
will do!
hTat's so funny. I loved Labyrinth but never really cared for the Dark Crystal.
lol i just tweeted this to
what did you get?
#Editing is the secret word of today kids
Hold on with Faith and nothing is impossible...
Rev up the 4 wheelers, it's muddin time..
22 hour drive from Nola to NY with Lezz do this
Yes, "viral" content indeed. Not the way they intended.
If you think branding is hard work...get it wrong and see how hard re-branding is
I want cookies. What kind should I get? Nom nom nom. -- Jonathan
S/O to my Publicist
9 o'clock why u no be here yet hurry!
Well that's good!! :D haha got any cool plans for the summer?? Like any vacations or anything?
"Even when I walk through the darkest valley, I will not be afraid, for you are close beside me." Psalm 23:4
And it's the end of another successful week! My eyes are ready for a break from the computer screen :)
my total workout time per week is currently < 3 hrs.
Over 3 billion people live on less than $2 a day. Could you?
What kind of mother decides to get a colonoscopy the day after Mother's Day?
got to
"THE LIMIT DOES NOT EXIST!"
Cool. We'll check it out!
Looks like chgo winter is finally here. Cue the complaints from ppl from the south...
Awww, I had to cut Dave Matthews and John Mellencamp (No Cougar) from the playlist. What a shame.
Mavs have a lot of new pieces and no training camp. Growing pains were inevitable. They've gotten their wake up call. Not worried.
Its like damn IM NOT GON TXT U BAC !
#KSsynapse Monteggia: In several behavioral models of depression & stress, low-dose ketamine rescued depression-like phenotypes in rodents.
Lmaoooo, my grandma just called rice crispy treats, vanilla rice.
Will they post the T-Plush conference online? Where can a guy see this.
next is the Oscars, Cows and the slots... don't know which order.. LOL
Like things because you legitimately like them, not because somebody else tells you that you should like them.
I know right! 8D
I dont see how btches do it
:) I'm doing all right, trying to keep busy and waiting for softball to start! how bout yourself?
Dang there they go again
Had my first conversation with a Canadian who finishes sentences with 'eh' and wearing a jewish 'chai-pod' shirt
looking forward to it
Power in numbers - group blogs mean each person has to write less, blog gets more exposure.
follow me then
Couple of hours and my girlfriend will be in Nashville. For good. Or, at least til we find another place to work and live in.
I love seeing my kids happy
Thanks man!
I sure hope this is a good indication of our season. Go Skins! With you all the way!
On my way -SF for my show tonight. "Live In San Francisco" Starts at 9pm, pt. SF is so beautiful this evening. I have the coolest job! LM
i ship you with louis, you look kinda like eleanor:) x
Affirm that everyday is and will be a good day!
Night everyone
sorry I got bounced out - forced reboot of my computer due to software updates :( Hope you guys kept the fun going without me :)
#MyWeakness ; Food :D
Thanks! Hope you're having a BLAST in Wicked! And thanks for telling me about She's amazing.
too sketchy,
...I can't stop saying #kettlecorn in a high pitched voice. Scared.
feel dorky saying it, but I am so proud of you. You are super cool. :-)
Wheeler: Key to IU's etextbook strategy: publishers make more, students pay less. If faculty opt in, students pay content fee
Congrats to Roger Woods who became Big Apple Brits 500th member and got a $500 voucher to the BAB store! Wait til our 1000th member sign up!
RT : #DPLA unveiling 1st DPLA platform at #dplawest now. They're hoping developers build apps to do fantastic stuff on it
now that my rebel xt dies and i don't have any expenses lenses, maybe it is time to switch from #TeamCanon to
omg they lied about changing lololol
For some reason I want to be good friends with you
isn't that cool? thx for the RT So curious as to where he is now!
believe it!!!
I've decided that I might just take daily manual labor jobs off of Craigslist all summer
Where is that shit @???I hate putting things away when I'm Drunk cuz I end up hiding it fm myself!!!
If you put a frequent twitterer on a list to get them out of your timeline, do you have to unfollow them? Seems a shame.
Getting ready for Kelsey's birthday party. Theme is this year. w00t!
WHAT ARE YOU ON.
What's your favorite frosting? Milk Chocolate Fudge Frosting? Cream Cheese Frosting? Or Buttercream Frosting?
CHOICE.....ONE OF YOUR MOST POWERFUL ASSETS..CHOOSE TO EMPOWER YOURSELF WITH CHOICES YOU MAKE....live, love, laugh, learn, care, give, hope
hahaha complete ultimate fuckery to the fullest extent!!! I'd literally leave the country.
Happy National Dance Week www.nationaldanceweek.org pass it on!
I'm not stubborn. I'm just eclectic.
#Productivity is the easiest way to be indispensable in your work. How much time could you save if you knew your desktop programs better?
Swear to you that I started studying Spanish at 2:30 this afternoon....12 hours later and I finally feel so solid about this 8 am.
amen, girl amen 
yea freddie thomas
it was all
I'm presenting on Ancestral Praxis and Computer Science Learning towards communal wellness #aera2012 increased focus on
Had a great shoot today with the cast and crew of "The Hardest Love"!!! Thanks to All! What great fun! ;)
RT : Save on all inclusives, family vacations, Las Vegas and more also let me feel your #vacation needs
Happy Cinco de Mayo to the #LTDArmy! Can't wait to see you all at the "Unrest in the Midwest" stoner rock festival in Geneva, OH tonight!
haha  he loves us!!! But mostly me  lol jkjk
Soda tax? I don't think anyone would give up their drinks for ONE additional CENT!
or 'bottoms up' :P
What do you mean?(:
lol, aw I love you too slut
We think people who don't use turn signals should probably make sure they have good life insurance coverage!
what's wrong with being hyper? RT : Wow! I think I've gone a bit over board with the caffeine today! I might start going crazy!
hmm. must have been from the Snuff Convention.
where at? What time? Yeah I'm interested lol
INTERESTED IN BEING PROMOTED AT THE #FREECITIMEDIA IN JULY AUMA EDTION HIT US UP FOR MORE INFO **SERIOUS INQUIRIES ONLY**
Just started and I love it. But I can't decide what my first book request should be!! Any suggestions?
What's your favorite Beatles song?
RT : "Nothing is quite as funny as the unintended humor of reality." -Steve Allen
At least production crew came to Great Neck this summer & took aerial photos of Fitzerald's home & area said to be West Egg.
I'm glad you have standards.
tweet that pic!
GO CHECK OUT #PAINKILLERS ON #DATPIFF!
Nurieza, and Araceli. Love your photos on your facebook. Thanks for liking Booksicals! Happy and Healthy New Year!
Thanks! I just saw this. I don't understand this twitter business. How are you?
MEMPHIS IS MOVING TOO SLOW FOR ME! ITS TIME FOR A CHANGE!
#fridayreads audio: Horizon by Lois McMaster Bujold (book 4 of the Sharing Knife Series). Yes, it's a re-listen, can't help myself!
So I started using Tumblr. I feel like my social life is slowly dissipating... Or any life at all
living. being a human. listening to where i need to be...
How is the social media/perfume business lately?
Why isn't the #indians game on tv today???
so crazy is this thing we call "love".
I know theres a really good reason I don't engage in productive behavior until 9:31 pm on sunday night… I guess I'll figure it out later.
so hows the weather in brooklyn
the IMF and G8 continue with there debt terrorism. a new cable to speed trade by a 6 milliseconds = 100bil annually! sounds like looting
my weekend bouta be the ish
if u do get lost, visit us by the registration table to learn some things about old cell phones
Who has my birthday tweet "11:17" :)
actually i wish i didnt care at all
it has been awhile. How's life and ?
heheh do it :) u get someone famous following youh hehehehe
On my way to work
yes :( make me happy :)
If only and I could be #Alphamale's. :(
both? No need to move the boys.
Idk Its Just Something About Her I Don't Like ! I Respect Her But I Just Don't Like Her /:
#Thingsthatpissmeoffinthemorning when people wake me up for no reason
yes there is bro, im just happy to #PayItForward now
The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself a fool.
Center watching my Nephew Isaac play at 1st intermission of Robert Morris & Ohio State
RT I'm pretty sure it's drive like a dickhead day. #getoffmyass Well put! Morons, more off than on.
ok I trying to get in on some conversations..u r the only person I tweet with
if hits another before june i will really be shocked
PAHAHA...TWITTER...Y U NO HELP ME STUDY?!
what time?Can we send in question to ask our leaders?
Ops! I don't have the download. Been listening from stream. Dang!
no, I connect in JFK.
Thank you! Will keep that in mind as I've only been up to Sonoma so it'll be my first time to Napa when I visit
Hurry up and give us a new song carly! <3
proud of you JB; keep working at it and be true to yourself ! how is the food over there ? You not losing weight ? lol
i was going to text at the red light, but it turned green as soon as i got there.
When says "My friend" >
oh shoot!
our NEW WEBSITE will be release tomorrow. It will also feature video tech charts from blackops!!!
If I am this tired moving at 35, I must make this my forever home!
Thanks for joining me from guys
Ok I tried... again... I just can't get into the new 90210 at all
And If She Talkin Slick . #HEADBUTTTHATHOE Just Cause She Aint Bout That LIFE !
the lady had me HYPE ova da phonee doee .. made me feel less of a BUM lol
I like you, Alot.
Heading to the mall
Awww. Welcome back stateside, cuz! I wanna hear all about it!!
Break legs & the rest of the cast in 's , opening tonight !
Haha alright in that case - Wimpy Kid, Dork Diaries, Big Nate, Magic Tree House...
I LOVE mac miller <3
it's seriously liberating!!!! And i don't catch myself wasting time looking at other peoples drama! :-)
Hey - I need to send you an email related to SW, but I seem to not have your address anymore. How should I reach you?
I'm gonna punch you in the gooch, Chris. ME and Zac! Duh! ;)
thx for our talk. #uncc's library redesign has been a hit: flexible furniture+white boards+connected study rms=inc collab&study
sorry man late on your bday.. but Happy bday! We all need to make a trip to NYC again and chill with you!
Great meeting you at the AMA gifting suites! Come follow us on twitter to receive special promotions!
My nail tech pimpin the sh*t out me. I went in 4 Diamond gel refill she send me out with the refill & diamond ring.
Martin Leach set to apparently give us a BROADacious (sp?) talk at
What are some tricks for making big decisions?
Can it just be Thursday yet?
The weather lately is even more schizophrenic than usual for Seattle. What's next? Locusts? Fire and brimstone? Actual cats and dogs?
Sorry, no, I only got one, and I'm keeping it.
My Lil bro is fuckin nasty
Don't forget about ! She stresses getting fiscal house in order to accomplish goals, motivate philanthropy
So is this weather coming or not?!?
Close to signing a deal with the Pats apparently
daughter.-b Don’t go to glean in another field. Don’t go elsewhere, but stay here close to my girls. 9Keep your eyes on the #Torah 34/99
Am I missing out on something having not read Fifty Shades of Grey?
yeah saw that. Where are you? I'm with group just below bar. Standing.
Depends, I guess? When did you see her last?
's spelling bee team out in R4 on "phlegmatic." fell to "penitence." R5: down on "verisimilitude"
Jake Cody and Sam Trickett Lead European Poker Awards Nominations
It's Friday!
RT Boost bar and diet coke , that shud wake me up :)
it's only been 373 days between tweets
That makes a "sad panda."
follow me !! (: i follow too
Good idea! :-) RT Touché ! Let's split time between both
So glad I got to meet you. Hope (both!) your speaking gigs were equally awesome. ;)
I disagree.
Our initiative will focus on the high schools with the largest concentrations of low-performing students to accelerate their success.
Online right now. Lake Shrine has mediation services on Sunday mornings- look into it. I've gone.
Only 15 mins until that great new #MothersDay tradition: The 3 hour season finale / wrap up of
Thanks for the 17 notifications, #Alphascope. Glad you're on top of things.
I got fat while I was in Miami :-( lol
And another happy birthday to Des Roar drummer/vocalist Lyla Vander - We don't wanna do you harm, we just wanna burn your name in our arm.
Life is short, think less and do more.
haha, nice. I had an ipod, but then it died:(
I love my daddy and momma I'm so spoiled lol but I deserve it :))
where you at?
the best day, lots & lots of love 💗
that would be Hartman wouldn't it? Use to be. Was with LA for a bit then in KC b4 Dallas. Also known as "el gato"
LMFAO ! This guy in the cafeteria was dancing..i think you can call it. it was hilarious!.
Feeling very sexy right now...
Im ok... lots to say, just not here. Lol Monday?
Sometimes I want to be optimistic, but every time I get too excited about something it never goes the way I hoped. Too emotional for this!
I try not to think about it to..long..I just Do the darn thang..it makes progress so much easier. ~Stacey Chatman~
Working on Cannibelle Christmas photos, doing laundry, and listening to anime while I work. Wonderful day!
Dear , You should follow me :). Pleasee?(: . I promise to be a true mahomie. Forever and always <3 -me(:
Hey....I heard you like the wild ones......
Starks is a hot mess today.
Rebecca's House of Coffee only place in a 100 miles 103 South Main Street, Elk City, OK 73644-5743 no website
Thanks for the #TT!
lmao! I know right!
The London Crew is back
How does one still have hs football dreams where he forgets his locker combination?
thanks I'm gonna stay on the hunt. I suspect there may be more to it.
Something tells me they're not going to show the replay of the check swing.
Just revisiting the idea that "I hope Brian appreciates UK". Nothing specific. Rambling tweet :)
Thank you for the mention and follow... XOXO <3
Also heard that Deerfield School District will be working with teachers on their handbook.
I hope the okc/mavs first round matchup stays put..
Damn, the game has me all charged up! Giants are Beasts!
Sweet bandana. It's a good look for you.
Then you need to do what you think is good for kids and their learning. Try not to worry about his opinion.
And the Good Rev Joe is just cool w/ those discrimination done in the name of his bigotry hiding behind his version of God?
I've been using clearomizers for about a month, I love em -not sure why people are saying that they are garbage?!?
. I dont think anyone is against micheal bush
Decorating the apartment for next year? RT : Just saw a Crate and Barrel truck and wanted to rob it.
If you score 5 goals in this #soccer league you lose? WWW.ussportspages.com
Wtf I really hate these braces theyre cutting my mouth
today's your day<3 I hope it's the best ever.
They say Andre Johsnon is the best in the NFL - I disagree. #CalvinJohnson is THE MAN. What a year!
so cute!
Subway Work Sinks Prices On East Side Some home buyers are hoping the short-term aggravations of Second Avenue subway construction will n
The sooner gets & JB a better time slot, the better. Best 1-3 hours on radio. Welcome back, Wojey!
yeah why can't I be the guy put the team on my back?
kicking ass and taking names! Life has been good. You?
haha no worries. Portland is painfully far away in June. Happy to reschedule whenever!
Are you still having the workshop/audition in each city your show visits?
Smirnoff is the sh*t.
does anybody know what channel the TCAs are on?
Showerflow in a bit
There's some fucked up people in my town... weirdest experience walking homee!
“Money won’t create success, the freedom to make it will. - Nelson Mandela Happy Birthday Nelson Mandela - age 93 today!”
Fuck talkin bout it,just do it....
Thanks to all the young professionals who came out to our event last night at the game!
Ling Out L, right now. :-D
At opening & ribbon cutting for member Freebirds World Burrito in Hillcrest. Welcome to San Diego
Stock up! That's what I'm doing. Just need to figure out where I'm gonna keep a lifetime supply of khaki envelopes... ;)
thank you for your service to are beloved steelers we will truly miss your smile every sunday
Happy Birthday #StevieWonder!!
that's up to Kobe
#Top100Lies "Im Ok""
Dr. Pepper is the shit 💙
ate way too much amazing food this weekend...
#NATO protesters throwing rocks at cars... how peaceful of you
"A team with something to play for can be dangerous, but a team with someone to play for is unstoppable."- AR offensive lineman Brey Cook
Popularity and "being cool" stopped mattering just at the age when it consumes a lot of kids.
RT: 24hr Google Wave invite give away! 1000 invites! Follow & RT to get yours!
thanks Brim! Its easy to love your job when you get to work with great people!
We support pets, pet rescues our military apple pie, good coffee and anything with a hot engine!
Let's all make 2011 our best year yet. Greet everyone with a smile. A smile is understood by everyone at every age.
New arrivals on SALE! If your resolutions include being happier,healthier,and more financially responsible we have the right reads for you!
Michael floyd amd larry fitzgerald thats a dangerous combo
"Then don't indirect tweet about me!" Lol, you heard her
Writing, writing, writing. High hopes for the new beginning we're constructing.
you rock!! Thanks for being the driving force behind Junior Nation!
I'm slow.
It's about to go down. Love it.
Or "I'm thinking"... but then it's been years since I started to just "think". I must continue thinking until I see the light.
Ew, gross. Sounds like germ central.
Infinite Jest by DFW. Enigmatic, witty, & enigmatic characters + ensemble. Needed to concurrently use a dictionary
Before I met you, I didn’t know what it was like to look at someone and smile for no reason at all. ♥
Art is human....
So happy for you!
I guess I wasn't good enough for you and I guess I never will be.
20 new followers since yesterday! Thank you!! Maybe we'll reach 200 by the end of the week? Retweet :)
so upset, is literally 20 minutes away from me & i'm @ home....someday i will see them
Irony: Everyone going blind in the year 2020?
I can't believe "Bust it baby" is playing on my pandora right now .... LMAO
We have followers from all the way around the world! A big shout out to our international friends!
our good friend donated his unfinished so we are now getting a full kit made instead of just a snare!
Excellent work Josh.Keith Jones is right.I know it's harsh but I noticed the same things re:Rad.He can't be treated special.
:) thanks boo!
ironic but great that other ppl are better than me at talking about my work :-)
imma be right down the road from you, plus we both have sundays off now?
Post purchase "likes" drive 20% more ticket sales -
I have a love/hate relationship with my hair.
This bitch is high af in class Lmfao.
couldn't open a water bottle so I got a different drink
WorldShare Platform is " flexible, open access to library data through APIs and other Web service"
Yikes. Just left the dentist :0. He's so sweet, lucky for me. Feel like I need a pill of some sort !
Starting my course works today, got loads.
troy murphy sighting smh
naw you wont trust me its the youth service for ages 18-30 yu will be fine i promise
You know there's no such thing as ghosts, right? Or compassionate conservatives?
RT : Part 1 of our big interview with Lance Higdon is coming up at 1:30 pm. Something to take your mind off the rain.
Michelle Obama is speaking in Omaha today.
Happy Mothers Day Mom!!! <3 you miss you can't wait to meet you again in heaven someday
Got another AP test in the morning :P
it wouldn't be a pretty picture, that is for sure! Sorry - see you 2ish at the Meems!
When you're writing, in your head, who are you singing your song to?
Happy Hours on your phone? There's an app for that: www.gotime.com/mobile
Still, it's ouchy.
excuse me I'm trying to find my ball..... this is golf.
I'm the guy that cheats on Beyonce. Buy my album.
Happy Birthday! RT : Oh right! It's Friday! So follow because it is his fucking birthday, and he is the best.
More and more companies are deciding to translate their websites, corporate documents and company services into Spanish. This short...
Stupid #hawaii weather and it's bipolar issues.
Whats this? o.O
The Dark Ages was caused by the Y1K problem
want on campus to celebrate the release of her new book?She's one of the most popular campus speakers in the US, find out why!
RT The Spurs are gonna roll the Clippers.
Via Forrester: "value is not in amassing Facebook fans, it's what you do with them."
Six inch walker - big shit talker .
im just in my room alone shirtless like always oh yea im bout to leave to sleep
. You're not bringing anyone else are you? Like
My only complaints is that Rhodey should have a larger role & that Whiplash was a very weak villain. But hell he sucks in the comics too.
lots of people say this. like half of the people RT : Man, I sure hope Obama is re-elected.
didn't wear the Arodge belt, but if I did it wouldn't have biggest. Them there country boys were out last night.
Hated hated hated hated hated and I don't give a fuck.
The girls could only stand 20 mins of 11/27/97 before I got "carly your hippie music is putting me to sleep." Some just don't understand.
I'm looking to buy a 2009 Chevy HHR. Anyone out there own an HHR?
Goals make analytics useful.
hands down the Exorcist
When I listen to #NeverSayNever and then #Boyfriend it really shows how much you've grown up! :D
Are you a small business owner or an individual needing health insurance? We can help! Email us at or call 719-520-3232!
i have no words i dunno if i can bare to watch
the lounge at is better than mcdonalds playland :-)
Congratulations to on the launch of their redesigned website!
It's my first Mothers Dayy!!! #HappyMothersDay to all the wonderful mothers out there. (:
careful with "reality" shows, I heard they are predetermined
Dear radio stations, you do realize there are more than just 5 songs in the world, right?
Ha! RT : Blackberry crashes for umpteenth time and when it reboots, Bing app mysteriously loaded.
I'M CHASING A DREAM THAT ONLY GOD KNOWS THE TRUTH IF IT COMES TRUE
your welcome! You deserve it dude! :)
I always get a warm reception where I go because I allow people to miss me.
I thought you were cleaning the downstairs sans twitter? want a takeaway?
hope the meet is tomorrow so i can run my, 100, 200 & 400! and do the long jump! :D
yeah girl
When there's 2 minutes left in the #bruins game. Im going to randomly call all my Bs fans friends...just to be a dick!!
cant sleepp, out and about.
Newsflash: The forum on faith communities and environmentalism on 3/27 at 7pm has been postponed until a June date TBA
#Sony finally restoring service, #PSN users must upgrade firmware and reset passwords!
#Greatfood is like great sex, the more you have the more you want
!!!!!!!!!!!!!! RT : I just can't get into that tech-pop shit coming from r&b acts just to stay relevant.
good night
American soccer broadcasters need to get cameras, angles right to show us MLS tifo. I feel cheated and match from Jeld-Wen hasn't started.
Isn't NY soo amazing their pizza and hot dogs are legit!(: Hope your having fun!
You are the only person standing in YOUR way!
I know I missed TX
D3 loses by a larger score. Both teams have a lot to build on.
iPhone 5: What rumors are true about the phone and what rumors are false? Tonight on FOX 9 @ 9PM.
#FACT ": I'm only perfect on days that end with "Y"
RT - With the 123rd pick Team Lee selects Rashad Jennings Running Back Jacksonville Jaguars
Mwah thanks! You pitched in with that envelope tutorial, too. :)
I'm a good anon. xD
"My kind of team Charlie, My kind of team!"
Me too! :As a new reviewer e-galleys were the main reason I wanted an e-reader. Almost a professional rec.
Hey MASA! You should check out They're a clothing line right outta Missouri. And they have free stickers!!
good job Matt ! Great listen
Q: In the last 6 months, how many of those FB pages have you returned to? A: 6-10
AND THEY INSTRUCT WELL ON HOW TO DESCRIBE SEX SCENES IN NOVELS
Yesterday, the tricksters were out in full force! We had several calls for help. We donned on our Superhero costume and saved the day!
When I mean massive I mean REAL big like one with an island for the valuables.
Think happy thoughts.
Tomorrow is gonna be a year since I met my idol and inspiration, Oh my goodness. I'm gonna cry!
1 headphone: BoyFriend other headphone: One Time<3
6:20 am flight, don't do it. Onwards
Bruce at the Garden in April is a must!
Quit spam tweeting me! It's mean!!!
Good Morning! We are so thankful for all the rain yesterday! It's absolutely a beautiful cooler day today! Did it rain where you are?
haha, I told you! But no now I live in Orlando. Arbor Ridge isn't the same anymore though.
its aliens shit happens
RT : thinking about our friends in Japan. xx Anna
HAPPY BIRTHDAY!!!
Living in Chicago and not having a car, I'd totally forgotten about truck stops. And their bathrooms.
what's the product strategy for #DBMS technology that incorporates the entire InterWeb? The only difference is scale :-)
Nice - Thx man!!
To that end, I want the time-stopping power of the half-alien girl from late 80s masterpiece Out of This World.
I jut love when my two year old cousin tries to take a shower with me
wait ok stop all the ali drama did joSH DO A TWITCAM WUT
: Very sorry, but that is playing at the , not
this movie The Janky Promoters wit cube , mike epps nd jeezy is funny as hell
“: brillion up 1...30 seconds ledt” your so nervous u can't type
we need more lemon pledge!
Happy Friday Tweeter. Happy #b-day Mr.
S/O to You have great Assets
you went to a Mexican restaurant on Cinco de Drinko. Blame yourself guru, blame yourself!
Or drop in a hazelnut Cadbury egg. RT : I may have to try 2 peeps next time, because right now this coffee tastes like sh*t.
“: Only 15 minutes left to enter our weekly #Giveaway! Answer today's #trivia correctly and you could #win! (trivia in Packrads)
Rat pack party! Join us 4/19, 6 - 9 p.m. Bleu Velvet: new cocktail debuts & cigars that Blue is introducing! RSVP
Remember remember the 5th of November.
love you too!!
lol thay dont mean squat! Whats his name? Age? And whats he like? He treating u like a queen? Do he hang in the streets?
Why do we love the ppl that hurt us and hurt the ppl that love us it should be the other way around
Losing hope of Austin finally noticing me/following. A year is a long time.
Do I get more Klout???
When its late & convinces you to buy Vegas bombs and says paying covers for random girls is a great idea
Didnt go to class this week. Its only the first week !
Have a gr8 three days. How's glenn's leg? Is he doing his rehab?
watching tv so bord :(
went to some hole in the wall empanada place. Was not too bad at all.
Quick-fix kale recipes, anyone?
Looking for #ThingsToDo in #Clearwater? TONIGHT at "ANCHOR ATLANTIC" LIVE 8-12am!
Thank you for yesterday's RT!
haha i had two and sold them both so i could buy xbox games. They're only like $60.
Great Healthy Eating article in about and our "La #Salud en Tu #Cocina" program.
We have a large collection of Chinese books on our lower level, and we do have some bilingual books as well.
Thank you, Amy! I've been turning SNAP story angles around and around in my head all day.
where do you go?
#MPF12 Firms spend a lot of money on branding and spend all their enthusiasm. They run out of gas before they've had a first mtg w/ anyone.
"I hope you have a child just like you! You little bastard!" #ThingsMyMotherSays LoL
do you have any pictures of the dress to share?
If you've always wanted a KelTec PF-9, I'm selling mine with an extra magazine. DM for particulars.
Hi there! Understand we have a common interest in Romare Bearden! Looking forward to chatting next year!
you're transferring?!
it's a group
Always make stock in a large quantity and freeze it in plastic bags.
hello Justin from VA Beach, VA!
It's such a good thing to see true ICONiacz and GRANDerz obsessing over the ICONic Boyz and vinny like the first time
When I go home, its an easy way to be grounded. You learn to realize what truly matters. Tony Stewart
are you sure? Cus people are telling me different things..
#WordPress #Tools Codebox – Creates a side scrolling box for displaying code snippets.
I hope not!
That akward moment when your BF/GF see's a sexy/hot guy/girl while being with you and he/she's like "Woo s"
Time to purchase #MLBatbat BEST mobile app out there.
Want to thank everyone that came to Posh and Mirage last night to see Wale and to celebrate the VSU step show after party!!!!
so are 99 year old great grandma's ! Not as sexy but definitely kewl !
movie marathon with 1st up..Silence of the Lambs!
that was soo gross!!
#Way2Go!! RT : Michael Smith should immediately advance to the next round. Made the correct call on KG illegal screen that never...
Watching the minute hand , frozen silent not moving.
#Cats was awesome!!! You guys did amazingly!!! Great, great job y'all!!!(:(:
Good luck with the new car.Nissan makes a good product.
I'm headed to 3yr old's Bday today, will try 'the Oprah' out on him. RT “: Every time I give someone a gift I yell like Oprah.”
We have our CD release coming up November 13th! November 15th the CD will go live on all major online stores! (iTunes, Amazon, etc)
subleasing out my one bedroom in midtown Manhattan. who wants to live in the coolest city in the world?
Happiness is an attitude. You can choose to be happy or miserable. The amount of work is the same.
Getting to the point I hope the barn doors fall off and they eat half the cast LOL :P...
what is pep'e
I'm obsessed with Miranda Lambert's new album. Baggage claim is awesome! :-)
Thanks for the follow. I read a couple of your blogs and thought they were excellent--I just posted one on my FB page!
Haha, guilty. I go through phases though.
I honestly don't mind texting you first. I just can't be doing that every single time
twilight won ever thing @ mtv movie awards
if that's the case i say thumbs up to a nap in the office. pretty sure my supervisor would not appreciate that though
I love crying in the rain. because when i do, no one can hear the pain......---
Ya I'm a little drunk on you and high on summertime
Great health tips for baby boomer guys on my health blog: www.itsaguythingblog.wordpress.com
#ronpaul Can win! Watching the Debate Tonight! Big fundraiser for him tomorrow!
My mom when talking about our 3.5 m/o washer that's broken..."You try calling them. You're way more ornery than Adam." Thanks mom...
Complimentary upgrade to a room with air conditioning at the Hyatt Regency Chicago?
Tamron Hall smacks down RW idiot. You go girl!!!!
I like to think of them as Beliebers.
And they lose again...
To the dome
Titanium is often chosen for its longevity, durability, strength, low weight, and corrosion resistance
An entire day of #topgear followed by
Divine sitting behind Clooney.
You Is Not Da Father.,! Here Dis Female Go Crying Nd Running Off Da Stage You Just Said He Was 100% My Babyee Father.,?
glad I'm not the only one -thanks!
#Travel savings available to #Timeshare owners that want out of their contract
Studies show that there is a direct correlation between the amount of time spent on financial education and Net Worth.
Up and running at about 6:30 am. Emailing my client in Isreal. I get such satisfaction helping my clients. This is what I was meant to do.
Oh, here I was deleting cache and cookies and all that good stuff. Hope it gets fixed quickly!
God made man before woman so the man would have time to think of an answer for the woman's first question.
I've been in Vegas all weekend, and I have yet to meet a person who is rooting for Floyd Mayweather tonight
Now wait, which one of you is the REAL perfectionist! :)
Ugh so annoyed.
I was like oh psh maggie I see how it is
Bought coconut milk for my apple cinnamon Cheerios. Yippiee!
Disappointments are just God's way of saying I've got something better in store
#WhyILoveFAMU I met my hubby there, in front of Foster Tanner, during a fire drill, in 98!
Life is very short and what we have to do must be done in the now
So fucking close to killing this fucking cat
Proverbs 31:30 ; Wow, that is something. I want to be that kind of woman.
Wedding that's pushing it hun!!!
Amber Ice
#seinfeldderbynames real and fantastic. Phantom spitter. Fat free custard. Chang. Latex salesman. Wear the ribbon
This guy next to me seems to be telling the girl he's with the complete history of WWI.
thank you for sharing this! It sounds like so many stories I've heard.
Really great hearing about FeelRich initiative promoting fitness & nutrition for urban audience
I agree, but many will take every opportunity to disagree with someone they oppose, even for weak reasons.
Can't just tell her, show her.
Mik! you look so BEAUTIFUL in your prom dress <33 i love youu and i am pumpedd for the six flags kick-off concert on JUNE 3RD!
I hate when someone calls you and you and answer theyre like who is this? I'm just like are you kidding me? you called me. annoying. -.-
It's coming soon! :)
You know what ,your talk is cheap just like you .
Life is crazy and if you don't laugh your ass off at most of the idiotic things people do..you may very well turn into an idiot yourself!!!!
Wat r u doing?
Hopefully we have this great of weather for the block party on May 5
Thanks Dina! We love you too.
yes it is - times a-changin' - little sad but also an opportunity.
Need to read the Time Travelers Wife again.
Mardi gras facts on #wisn12 the official colors are purple green and gold. Stands for justice faith and power
Wheat Thins YUM (:
Those who cannot change their minds cannot change anything. George Bernard Shaw
Took two core reference classes at Central today. Ask me anything about Health Resources or Children's Reference Materials.
he is my eating partner at night . I hate having dinner by myself and my mom doesn't eat past 5pm .
where? Connecticut possibly...ahah i wish
nevermind, we don't have it!
Yes! I love Pinterest! You?
No human being believes that any other human being has the right to be in bed when he himself is up. R. Lynd Happy Sunday!
I have probably missed a few. The first one I read was Tim Blair's in 2004.
New Obsession: C2O coconut water. It's luxury and healthy hydration in a can.
Relationships are about give and give, not give and take. You know you are with the right person, when they give as much as you.
better follow back p.s. im watching your vid. right now<3
beat me to it.
10 more minute and I'm out the door
-- If you have a tudor/homeschool, every day is like Saturday or Sunday.
Happy Birthday Trey Parker!
Messge me, im bored
Took 2 hours to update my iPhone but totally worth it!
Thank you needs to go out to all the wonderful people at STONG CHILDRENS HOSPITAL AND NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH. you know who .you are.
So this Heat team might win in 5, eh
Nothing like the smell of a packed 47 bus during rush hour on a rainy day.
Feel like I need a nap. Gym later. Let's lose five pounds before tomorrow?
Now following ...Hi! Thanks 4 following!
Have a great weekend ! Please extend best wishes for a great weekend on behalf of Central Region
wait...you like him?
should they also have mustard in them?
My 2yo son begs to go to the Aquarium. Turns out he's only into the ramps & escalators.
RT : We lost our 2 cancer yesterday.
much respect to y'all keep pushing music is dope
Got to call that pass interference. C'mon ref
So how did you bring in the New Year?
For many salons, investing into a great internet marketing strategy has proven to be the best investment ever made!
and endoscopy yes. Very ugh.
Had been using m.check.in to plug into multiple location-aware services, now it's gone. Luckily works better (now on Android)
EEk - almost looks like it came stuffed with feet!
I’ve learned that everyone wants to live on top of the mountain, but all the happiness and growth occurs while climbing it. – Andy Rooney
My pleasure... that was a great post. :) RT : thanks for RT
even if it's just the retina display, that's a hell of an update.
I presume you mean the cabdriving part and not the book-signing part. … Congrats?
GO HARD HE AIN'T BULL SHYTING
You're welcome!
as you should :)
Congrats! Can't wait to hear about it. I should be able to swing by ... see you then!
some body that has officially become a non factor
It feels nice to call you mine <3
haha, true! seems like just yesterday that we were trying 2 figure this crazy Twitter thing out :) hope u guys are well!
20% OFF RED TAGGED SHOES AND APPAREL UP UNTIL SUNDAY 4-29-12
Great voice message @ yer office!
We just use our favorite recipes & add Yummy #cannabis goodness for patients to enjoy!
haha i knew it!
I'm sitting in the car with my seatbelt on
Hi Cedar! :D
Give a tweet tweet for We have tons of great lunch deals for FiDi!
always picking fights you are :)
#WiseWords Suicide,a permanent solution for a temporary problem, Always think before you do something &remember things are gonna get better
Just got done rockin Rockford!!!!
LMFAO this kid is in the back of the car singing along to a song and he don't even no it
well, not me
Woke up this morning and though BEACH TIME!!!!
I agree. This is a mess. Team can't keep playing from behind!!! NEED PITCHING!!!
first OSU safety task force meeting over...members refuse to comment...university spokeswoman says no one will be commenting for now
enjoy your time while u can, the real world can wait!! Trust me. Lol
AM bikram yoga - #dedicated #crazy #crazydedicated?
when are we going to connect and hang out?
Amazing panel at Philadelphia BMA -Channel mnarketers from. Motorola-Subaru- Braun Medical
Can't wait to see I miss those "sessions" w/ her. Lol
I'm going to do the Ashevile half in September. You doing it this year?
Yup there it is...he's wearing the mask
I did it!!! Finished my first 5 k!!!
Thank you, Billy!!
Love isn't a necessity ,still nice to know someone will always be there to hold you down
Albert Fish, Ed Gein, and Dr. Satan are highlighted... Lizzy Borden is also shown briefly
perfect for at home moms...www.millionaireminds.org Free discount texts with an unparalleled opportunity attached
I'm glad you're good. I'm too. Oh, okay. How come? What have you been up to today?
Who and i feel you bro GQ
Someone once asked why I have so many projects. I replied, cuz if I didn't I would lose my mind, LOL!
. has one of the best twitter follower/number of tweets ratios in the game right now.
Good job Croce cut out the Cancer
has the most amazing ideas (:
That actually meant a lot. Thank u so much<3 :)
Saugatuck on memorial day with my friends....
RT if Demetria saved your life. ♥
Seems my bladder still thinks its hilarious to wait until I'm comfortable in bed before voicing it's need to pee.
RT haha, good shit. I think he said he was dropping instrumentals and acapellas for the whole album, I t...
Gave speech today using Pages and found scrolling distracting. What app suggestions do you have for speaking from your #iPad?
Happy Holidays from the Dish :)
Getting a new house in San Antonio.. we've run out of room in this one : )
I love my life, and it is my dream to help you love yours...
please follow me i love u so much
What up big homie!
~ Awww, that's sad! Your heart should always stay open :)
Thanks for following Suburban Cowboys! NEW YEARS EVE at MAVERICKS in MUNDELEIN!!Giving away Brad Paisley tix!
Norfolk State just beat Missouri 86-84 in the NCAA Tournament. Congrats to the MEAC and all HBCU's
According to our unofficial survey, the most attractive people in this city are at In case you need an excuse to show up
On the search for
not sorry you're in the convo at all, but deeply sorry to hear of the cuts.
Sometimes I lay in bed looking at the stars & I wonder... Where is the ceiling?
Portland Public Library hosts the Library of Congress' traveling exhibition in Monument Square. September 2nd&3rd from noon-8:00pm.
We do now!
How do I cancel a quest from Papa Smurf? I accepted it before I realized that it required paid content. Now I'm stuck.
Thank you for having my collateral question answered. Much appreciated!
Actually, you can email our GM Nick at - We will need some info about CFS. Thanks!
RT : *looks at clock* yeah its about that time.. ◄ lmao shut up no its not haha
I wonder how many people in this class are actually paying attention... I'm looking around and I only see facebook
Whose yo daddy
good thing: locking an interview time w Sen. Ducheny Bad thing: it's thursday at 11am. So now i have to drive today. Is i-5 the best way?
I nee to chill out.. Im goin crazy rite now
i know right ! So whats upp ? :)
Softball tournament :D
I'll leave it alone then...
he probably does, but still a bummer..I like watching him pitch.
Stale Faced Yo Ass . Thats Was a Dumb Question lol
Looks Like Imma Be Limping All Day!
Im so gonna sleep onw lol
Ok, you get like 12,000 cool points for that shot with the incomparable Dick Gregory!
Thanks for the #FF!
I really want to watch War Horse on demand to finish my Oscar best pics, but it's long and probably very horsey. I'll watch it one day soon.
I Don't trust people who take cameraphone pics in the mirror all the time, but got different phones every couple of pictures.
Wecome to California Coast Credit Union.
I haven&#39;t got my learn on this early since college
I hate running.
I order another mint julep & the waiter laughs at me.
Happy Mother's Day, ! I'm honored and blessed to be one of your eight children! I love you!
Um 's spring band part on April 28 features Beach Fossils. Who's coming with me?
We have re-assembled The Trigon Trifecta & we are heroes.
hey follow me too :'D
Departures Salon Series 4/27 starting at 5pm with ASTRONAUT Mike Mullane and live music from Aaron Lewis
Three words to describe my walk to : Beware the puddles.
Whenever someone asks me how old I am I always pause in thought. Yo no se sometimes.
say what? No love for moi?!?
Hahaha, good to know. I do too. :P Lmao, tmi. I'm gonna shutup now.
you looked hot tonite on the show btw :-)
pretty good!
hit me up when you're here. we can drink whiskey and shit.
AND I....NO THAT HE WONT BREAK MY HEART...ITS TIME....TIME FOR US TO SETTLE DOWN... #CIARA....and I
#ItsInsaneHow most people would rather do something to you than to do something for you
Forgive the self-promo: We're having a "Boston: Inspirational Women" book party on 01/18 at Elisha Daniels Boutique 6 p.m. Please stop by.
New job, new city: who should I be following on Twitter for Portland news & PNW library stuff?
Chasing my sister barefoot in grass > im wearing sandals and she didnt think i would do it >:)
Finna text random people in my phone.. I must be bored
#WhitneyCNN I can say. "Once upon a time in my lifetime I was touched by the person and spirit of Whitney Houston"
Three some of chicks in front of us. Fml
best of luck for tomorrow's TM
No wonder why I can't get a RT!
You all have three choices
I want those pants but ill have to get a sz bigger cuz they'll be too skinny lol
good lookin out appreciate the support
I'd rather just stay at home, talk to you nshit...
hahaha thank you but I am not cute. I am a tan, fist pumping, shore crazy, hair gel dude.
it's very charming.
you definitely should! it's going to be a sweet show :)
might be developing a thing for rainboots.
Hope you aren't hurting too bad & have a speedy recovery!
why thank you. :)
I hate when I do this. I came home, ate dinner and fell asleep. Not it's 1am and I'm wide awake. Stupid naps.
Mcdonalds getting to damn high n they food aint all that good nomore for the lil shit they give u now
are you by a girl with a sign?!
Well, there's a Mum's day vibe -- where applicable.
samesies. Heard it last night at the end of the movie "Warrior". Of course it's been in my head all morning.
great Love your pic :)
White girls who think their black. Sit yo ass down somewhere.
First day of summer w/o the trip to but what a great 9 weeks! Still can't believe there are no more treasure boxes to make.
Quiet strength. Virtue.
Oh wow that sounds great! And it was an excellent call using SM for the vote. People want to be involved, that's for sure!
Yu don't like that? “: ": Guys I just hate Yu Darvish." How DARE Yu!”
Watching Smallville Series finale =,(
Good work out with at the Y! I'm so proud of her 😊
piso ditched school today. arg lunch sucked.
Seems like all the hours of days past are blended together!!!Daylight savings messes me up!
#Yeah :P
Check out the brand new song Loss/Gain! Let us know what you think! Thanks for all your support!
In my last post is one of my fav recipes. The peanut sauce is great in other dishes like noodle bowls, grilled veggies and as a marinate!
Thanks for the tweet, glad you liked the post!
Work your fingers to the bone, what do you get? Bony fingers!
In mesquite with my friends and their mom. Its so nice out here! :D
I didn't want to say it on Facebook, but yeah I remember - it was on 9/11
I clearly missed the memo...why isn't the 'G' in Gimenez pronounced like an 'H'?
I think it's stupid that everyone in The Matrix has these cool monikers, but then I know everyone here by their twitter handle
The best feeling when you see he at lest for a second
oh welcome to productive poem day 1/11
Aww thank you sir!
Lunch time means nap time today
ART TIME PUNKS now available at !
im Taking my Place in MY-Story, NOT HIS Story...
Someone just told me "you have a tan line, I wishes I could tan" lol
Damn I think you're gonna love the holiday video series. I said we were launching today but I was wrong. Tomorrow for sure.
Need new texter or some body new to talk to 
congrats Mickey, welcome to the club
Can't do that bullshit nomoe
RT : RT if you want to come to syracuse- show him some love
that's awesome news!! Will you be home tomorrow?maybe we can come on a cookie delivery!
I am hearing about you …global right now! :)
MT W/ no debate? Did Members even read it? RT BREAKING: House passes budget resolution, 235-193
sun come out!
i'll look forward to them, only for them NOT to show up in my sub box for some reason. -____-
Once you are in the natural flow of your own light you stop struggling with life and you dicover an inner feeling of calm.
I got these lah slippers on.
were you added to the Facebook group for the team?
We are going to launch a web store in the next few weeks so people who missed the can order a copy of the film.
One of the best live acts I've ever seen...will never forget Sabotage at Lallapalooza...
Y’a-t-il un lien de streaming sur le web pour le #MWA5 ?
And, who wants to be my guest (comp) for the new musical Nobody Loves You, Sat 2pm at The Old Globe in SD?
During college, I waited tables at Mellow Yellow + learned how to talk to all sorts of patrons. Owner Ken Pelletier any relation?
listening to fix your face radio
tell mom to pick me up at 5- 5:30
I LOVE IT! You are so awesome! I love the random mediums and things that inspire you.
I'm done with Ireland seriously .
I will and you do the same.
hiding from da. World
Hi all! Another great day to come!
Where did the time go... Seriously it's 1 a.m.
Life may not be the party we hoped for, but while we're here we should party with sluts
s/o to my new Followers
I agree.. no pressure on Brady he had all day to pick at us
They relayed survival strategies: avoid certain white folks' homes, carry weapons, refused to let daughters work as babysitters. One (cont)
Did not know that! Think they had an interest this time? Or just no choice?
There's a crow outside of my window eating a dead squirrel's brain. Make a cute cartoon show outta that, Disney!
Glad to have you! RT : Pleased to announce my inclusion in No.101 Midwest Issue!
I saw your last tweet about your frustration with StatsCube. I work for NBA Digital (.com and TV) and would value your feedback
I introduced #googleapps in my office and unexpectedly took on the admin role
notice me!! D;
I love limericks, but that link isn't working
which weekend are you going to?
Bymyself I need sum to du
Anyone wanna go skate?
I need to use that first one, especially.....
if he has a deal for a tv show & he has a lockdown on the distribution then that's the one! :)
sure! i miss you D:
Sounds good. I'm about to make some waffles up in here, up in here.
RXP & MetroPCS giving away FREE Weezer tickets on LES corner of E. Houston and Essex St. Right now til 815!!!
March Madness, Spring Fever, Ides of March converge.
Sir, I will be there at 6:30
Yes! RT : If I can subscribe instantly to your newsletter, I should be able to unsubscribe immediately as well.
Get big and go hard in the paint
American horror story is such a cool, confusing, intriguing, scary show and I love it
Good luck !!
Pre-sale link for Saratoga is not working on Brandi's website.
Thanks for the recommendation last night! Hope you've had a great second day!
Ted Nugent: promoter of violence, questionably treasonous, supporter of castle doctrine & serial rapist. A perfect spokesman for the GOP...
I wonder if Newt Gingrich could drop the price of kale?
fuck you to bitch. go suck some dick
Yes please! RT Hey , what if you put some bike infrastructure on Military Road?
Damn I fucked up
#Clippers need to get it together! Should have won this game! I'm disappointed
Did I mention that I LOVE HARRY POTTER?
I quickly thought of when I seen #SubwayFan trending 💘
Yes. It could happen!
I fixed it for you(:
If we run we win
awww..I've been alright. Busy and stressy but things are getting better. I need 2 stop by the office this week, I'll say hi!
On my way to see and with Should be a great night shared with friends.
Listening to 's HELLO EARTH: THE MUSIC OF KATE BUSH. Divine.
And I can't forget going to NC to visit my babies. <3
<3 Live everyday like it's your last <3
The truth is never going to change. No matter what someone believes in, the truth will always remain the same. (Bible Crash Course)
Yippee! RT : Next time you are in New York I will make you my ice cream!
you are welcome! Get better! you are in my prayers.
believe... once you see me in person, your ganna be like "ohh damn..i am prettier"
Panel allows Honda to make IndyCar engine changes
It's hats for Fernando Torres!!!
Oprah is giving away free KFC GRILLED meals. www.unthinkfc.com. Timing was on KFC's side with Swine Flu and no one wanting to eat pork...
I did notice the only heads were Washington.....lol
Astounded and humbled by God's great mercy, love, and forgiveness in my life, that while we were still sinners Christ died for us
im a good listener:P Though Im still not sure how a project requires kayakingXD nice talking to you too:) Hope you come to FL
I am playing at Auggies in The Gaylord Palms tonight 9-1a.m. In Kissimmee, Florida
Today is: Truck Driver Day, Vinyl Record Day, Baseball Fans Day, Eleanor Roosevelt Day, Chinese Valentine's Day & International Youth Day.
Hoodmourning Tweepers it's gym time time to get big or go home
You are welcome--thanks for YOUR support!!
I guess it depends on how many kids you have / whether they've had their naps. ;)
In Music Meeting- Ted Leo & the Pharmacists “Mighty Sparrow” upbeat and driving, interesting sound, it’s good
Good morning, Austin! Let us know if you need help with your relocation needs.
Even in defeat, Christine O' Donnell served a very useful purpose. The old "scared straight"": acting conservatively
I'd like to get back to the woodcarving finals. -
is ready for October.
Supposed to leave at 3:15 now.
Y el tuyo?
you got barz
Just found out scientists are one step closer to making a real INVISIBILITY CLOAK check it out Escapist
Big Business beware. Don't treat people badly especially in times of grief. My Twitter network is bigger than yours!
just got some yoga pants
Low clouds and some patchy fog for your Friday morning - headed for partly cloudy later - muggy, 70s coastal, mid-80s in the valleys
The fastest way for people to ignore #TornadoWarnings is to begin warning people 24 hours in advance about "potentially"deadly storms.
The cross-Atlantic silence begins now. Ciao ragazzi!
awll thank you! (:
Come play dodgeball with ΑΚΨ Beta Iota at 6pm tonight in the UV Sweethome Gym! Pickups are at 5:45pm in the SU Lobby!
Ur video was awsome I loved it!
Thanks for the blog plug!
No I don't make beats lol
Spanish guys are yummy ;)
A chill, solo Sunday night off is the perfect end to a great day and a wild week.
Time for the start of a wonderful date night with
Prop 8 overturned? ...bummer.
Kelly Price's album release party at Fashion Forty yesterday was a great event! Her new album is amazing!
Meeting wrap up by Very informative. Hope to see everyone in 2011.
I dig your #Absolut commercial.
Right after your follow, a follow from , "security and privacy for computer displays." Coincidence? I think not. ;)
Good try on that phishing expedition-- you
Promo Divine Peeling Radical White Skin Matrix from Swiss-instant whitening peeling in only 45 minutes only Rp 375.000 valid only this month
hahahha people are always so surprised in my taste in guys.
I need you guys to follow me for me to send you a direct message back with my address
Everything that they do they tried 1st in Wisc. #LtGovKleefisch #PigSly": RT : attacking motherhood and cancer
today was a good day
I'm gonna miss you guys :( be safe heading home!
bahaha. I just made some last night. It was super good. Chili competition this summer!!!!!!
What a perfect Chattanooga Spring Sunday. Complete with a surprise garden party & photographing a walnut Street bridge sunset proposal.
The only people that enjoy Valentine's Day are girls with pussy-whipped boyfriends or husbands.
I'm about to leave for work actually...feel free to come visit and watch the game.
- Steve, be prepared to cry like a little girl.
Guetta tonight?? I'll be there!
Just when I thought I was strong...I'm not...just when weakness was a option...it's not...I HATE cancer...it should die...I give love
Suspense! RT : What's next for us- Ottawa, Seattle, Georgia, Virginia? Or maybe we'll be able to stay in DC. Stay tuned.
May's here, and graduation is right around the corner! Which of our menu items do you order when you feel like celebrating?
I love that half-minute period when you write the 4-5 lines of fundamental math that power an entire application.
please follow our business page we work with AIP clients.
I loved Hunger Games! Just wish I hadn't seen it with a bunch of screaming little girls.
I was staying home, when they was having fun.
If you could develop a #MobileApp, what would it be?
dolphin + helicopter =
why yes, yes I do
Yes. Totally agree. But there are plenty of businesses with interest in education. I cover them...good, bad, and ugly. Thanks!
it will happen one day
Shooter can't cross the plane of the free throw line until it touches the rim. Otherwise, perfectly timed.
If I knew I was going to be in a video, I would have worn my best flanel. :) #CountryRoots #Wrangler Damn straight.
....they will never tell your secrets!!!!
4th of july movie party. Only independent films allowed.
If you have a craving for Mexican/margs before you leave, Casa de Reyes in Old Town is yum! Got free churros w/4square checkin.
I wonder if it is possible to follow everyone on twitter... might make another acount to try.
wat y'all looking at
Im living my life for me & my kids NOBODY else!!
Omfg my dog had her puppies
I'm so tired
Back in elementary kickball was the sh#t and aftercare was live asf
Can I punch somebody in the face, just for kixxxx?
Thanks for the re-tweets! We look forward to seeing everyone on Wednesday!
the 3 mo meal planning package. Thanks! :)
Remember that core strengthening exercise (like yoga) are great to help prevent & ease #backpain; a strong core stabilizes the spine
lol intervention on masturbation
Nothing to do this weekend... #NoPlans :(
Why people scan QR Codes? 46% Curiosity, 41% obtain info, 18% a promotional offer, & 16% for exclusive content.
No Doubt about it, Larry Diamond from Tom Robbins's "Half Asleep in Frog Pajamas".
Well here we go
Get the final battle shirt of #HarryPotter called "Behind you Harry" available at ripapparel.com this Wed. Aug.3rd by
Yeah, I understand. I'm happy that is in the process of revising its commenting policy.
Hey Doug! What do you think of my portfolio? I still can't believe it's finally finished.....for now :)
I can't forget you I know you want me to want you I want to But I can't forgive you
back on track
My parents annoy me 24/7 though. Nothing new.
I'm taking you #2 in my fantasy draft, man! Don't let me down! LOL
Nice RT : I have a cup of Clover brewed Willow in hand and it is totally helping me beat the PDX heat!
Make sure there are no sharp objects in the dark room for
Hold on stop Wait a min Pause
2012 Submission Applications will be available June 1st. Looking forward to seeing your work.
Still a good defensive effort from the rest of the team. I blame kobe for the loss.
I find it amusing that Republicans crow abt how Reagan "won the Cold War" but thr rhetoric suggests that they think we're still fighting it
But im having fun at senior night :-) :-)
would rather be watching the game in San Diego than on my couch
Want a new career for the new year? www.trgcs.com/joinus.html
Big Day for parents across the nation! Final Florida vote and big news coming out of California!
HELL NO.
you sure are at olive garden a lot,.. (;;
my 50 year old mom just told her 70-something mom "peace out."
Girls, don't fall for boys who tell you the sweetest words. Fall for boys who do the sweetest things which no words can describe.
i have returned to facebook. i feel so dirty.
tell Boehner not to give in stay strong
Head over to your local natural products store to pick up natural, cruelty-free body products.
Great idea ! A5: Encourage them to connect w/ #PRSSA/#PRSA Chapters where they are for the summer to stay involved
lol just give it away before she steals it
no problem
Zip Me Up Motherboy
yikes! Tebow-mania coming to There's still room on the bandwagon
40,000 people without power! We still have power, but no internet :-( I guess I will have to see if anyone comments on my status tomorrow!
RT : High school football season is almost here. Want local live scoring updates on Twitter? Follow
seattle.catalogchoice.org comes online. Seattleindieads.com looking forward to FLOOD of hyperlocal ad spending by local businesses ;)
What doc my Tweet Master?
IF YOURE IN MIAMI TRICK YOU WILL ADD: "Kroz Jones" on ¡FÁ©∑BØØk!
wow a Patron shot even. Yep yep them our Lakers. Yeow! Kobe Rules!
I been good, how you been?
By all accounts it was a great screening yesterday @ the fest! Thanks to all who came out & enjoyed such a fantastic lineup!
I want Juvaderm filler so fucking bad right now.
THOUGHT FOR THE DAY: Work spares us from three evils: boredom, vice, and need. ~ Voltaire
doesn't make sense that you can't spell "sense" and you are on presidents list.
I know. But school comes first.
Hum okay then I believe you. Even though it's kind of hard but I believe you so what's up how was your day? :) !*)
Spring is ending and ALC classes are back in session on Mon. 4/16. Just in time to celebrate National Volunteer Week!
lol! Hey! I'm here:) just been busy.
follow back dre :)
Noticed all the building makeovers in Portland? What's going on? Why are investors interested in historic buildings? 6:30pm
TODAY and TODAY ONLY, Show us you are a FB fan/Twitter follower at the door and get complimentary admission!
RT : I cannot wait to go to platos closet!!!!!!!
Tyga-make it nasty
Agreed! Would love to hear what that looks like. Also, I would encourage thinking about tech as well for those future jobs.
I'm thinking Paris!
I almost left out the house in liquid leggings tonight. Thank God for sending sweet baby Jesus to intervene.
ill just take your word for it that they're all crazy.. which i suppose just supports what i already think anyway…..
This would imply that Campbell had any mascualtion in the 1st place
what's the expiration date on fur vests? end of march? first 70 degree day? look, this is important.
definitely the plan, last thing I'm looking to do is something stupid 3 weeks out! Thanks!
see what dis LSU AND BAMA GAME TAKING BOUT TONIGHT
I think Undercover Boss has run its course...
READY FOR DIVORCE, CALLA US NOW. 727 474 9988
Our business in life is not to get ahead of others, but to get ahead of ourselves
My cat, Mew, with his hair poofed out, terrified of the wind, was KNOCKING on the door to get inside! He’s an indoor cat...
:o I WANT LIKE NOW.
There is something so beautiful about the idea of giving.
Just joined SoundCloud and put my new two-piano pieces there - soundcloud.com/hand2ear.
You love me but you don't know who I am, so just let me go...
and , there will be a screening of Extreme Rules tonite at my house if interested. Bring fans.
lol the day before.
Life is awesome! I love when i am on set,and when i am w/ people that i love,specially the cast! RT if you love you`re lives!
Coloring Pages Featuring Children with Disability
Wow, that's random. But I'm stewing it over! :)
NEW HF-TWESTIVAL BAND ANNOUNCEMENT coming up at 3PM EST.
This beer belly though.
How did I manage to collect all this laundry within one week?!?
commuting from Louisiana once a week makes me definition living out of my car
Camille went into labor this morning. the baby is on the way. it's a girl.
Runners: What is an acceptable run to wash ratio for your various pieces of running attire? I.e. How many runs do to get b4 you wash?
Love In The Tempranillo Of Cholera
Had such an amazing day w/ family & friends! Just enjoying these last few days of school. Ah, crazy to say that! This year has gone by FAST!
Recovering from failure is often easier than building from success.
I love Bolton Hill but Montgomery Street is awfully convenient and pretty.
The Avengers was dope!
Yes that is right
Right back at you from Scottsdale! \m/
today is 'International Museum Day'
Ever heard of an iHub? It suppose to be an office for people who work from home.
Can't tell if the white progs RTing and favoriting my last tweet are agreeing with it or just non-endorsingly amplifying it...
Well, if I can answer any other questions or book anything for you, let me know!
Obama is a disaster, Gingich is a hypocrite!
I really love watching this Orioles team.
I refuse
I need a suga daddy!! No sex involved!
I made my own V8 today! #RawFood challenge!
Let's go #Giants!
i should cry because im gone miss on 106
May everyone work hard to make their dreams come true this year!! :) It's a prosperous yr and its worthit!! :)
My dad's boss randomly told my dad yesterday that he would pay for my first semester of books next year. Words cannot describe how thank ...
Nothing makes me hungrier than a photo that immediately brings to mind the word "abortion"
“: ridiculous!!!! But awesome for those schools.” Way to pick up that twitter game!
Omg my eyelids are SO heavy
I love you all soo much I love doing all I can for you<3
Had Arlene Sahraie not been a librarian, she'd have loved to be the proprietress of a groovy teahouse/poetry salon. Or a boxing judge.
With the passing of Avery Goodrich this weekend, Milwaukee has lost a veteran principal (North, Muir, Wells St.). Condolences to his family.
Indeed! So very important.
Behind every successful man is his woman. Behind the fall of a successful man is usually another woman.
Hello, hello remember me? I'm everything you can't control.
I have a 15k credit limit
so is singing too me :))
more obfuscation, more problems.
RT : Great show! <<YEAH! So glad you like it...thx for your support! Keep watching!!
#CBSNJDebate the Numbersusa ad is very insightful.
Me2 Jax! Whitney had one of the best voices ever. Anytime I hear always love you Im brought back to being a little girl
Chapter 2012 Page 95 of 366 I've chosen the consequences of walking in disobedience...SMH
yes, that is true!
“Advertising is a tax for having an unremarkable product.” -Robert Stephens, Founder of the Geek Squad
I got an A on my Stevens paper!! Ah it is good to be me this morning.
I know! Loved the movie! Lenny K is my new secret boyfriend.
I like how the Declaration of Independence says 'pursuit of happiness' meaning to pursue what makes you happy but then there's laws/con's
I'm kind of ready to dump my ils
Wow. Sounds like a real hoot in your kitschy kitchen. Hey wait, maybe a show idea for you. "Kitchsy Kitchen!"
- what!?! Well it was my first real commitment to them as a band, and saw that tour. I really like the mix on this record...
good luck jeff..
People don't change; they become more of who they really are.
#NW Basketball Wives...
I'm going to miss my school so much next year. Not just my friends, but the teachers and the rest of the school. Montessori is awesome
Next session: journalistic ethics w/ deborah blum, george johnson, dan fagin, dennis meredith
Come on Rubens!
Touché sir. Hit me up later if you're not in a coma.
Loving - 's clementine. You can too at #hubwork this thurs.
Going homee already (:
you have a way of tingling my spidey sense oh wow
times wen we R furthest from God is wen we need the body of Christ th most blessings 2 U :)
idk if its the way it is.. then imma unfollow people on tumblr.. idc who it is but its time to start unfollowing people!!
and how are you if yhu tweetin???
Headed to present my book at the national sales for the distributor - pray it goes well!
we gifted them existence.
The mobile app is looking really sweet. Time to work on copy, copy, copy....
I love Iration and Slightly Stoopid tho. And a former neighbor of mine ... who absconded with my fave CD ... has a R band.
Finally found #Silk flavors: ChocoMint = meh; Nog = good; Pumpkin Spice = DELISH!!!! Thinking it will be awesome in pump spice latte!
Which workouts have given you the best results?
Justin Has Swag .... you are so sexy in Boyfriend <3 <3 ah
Off work. Love morning shifts
I have not heard from my book store!
They don't make better sparkpluggies than you. Save me a seat, please.
anyway, I'm just interested in having a better understanding of font hinting, which is here for a while, retina or no.
Check email please.
WHATS GOOD CUZ I STILL GOT THIS RAP SHIT BY THE NECK,THATS MY WORD
it's pretty awesome! I don't abuse my snooze alarm anymore and don't get tired after working out either!
What track was you feeling...Orphanz™
u kno im fukin wit da hood so u supprt me and i support u. Dats wuts family for
Alas, the post makes the common mistake of assuming curation = selection. Blergh.
Cha cha, you are no help when it comes to rocks
Is anyone else attending the expo this week in #LosAngeles? I will be there!
Great story from about the impact that blogs & media can have on patients/community.
going to hang out with a girl named ana ...how ironic right?
I will definitely make plans to get there!
idk man.. You're fast but I can hold you.
ewwwww what happen who beat yo ass
MOVE ON BITCHES BLACK FRIDAY ADDRESS THE ISSUE ENOUGH, SO WE ON NEW MOVES #TEAMKIM ALL DAY BEDSTUY DO OR DIE
no problem at all - let me know day before, and we'll have one ready for you! ;-)
Lets take a stroll :D
If they would let us play music during the test I think I would pass...
One of the more fascinating topics of life is the leaders of history and how they shaped the world
please pick the Penguins to win, please???
I leave dat Reggie to them regular people I be on first class spaceships yeah spaceships🚀🚀🚀🚀🚀🚀🚀
I'm hiring booking agents. You book the engagement and receive 20% of my honorarium. Email if you are interested.
Thank you for the Golden Beet Recipe! Part of a new farm share & had no clue what to do with them!
#followme or bungee jump with dental floss..
boy i never have done that !
Davy Jones died apparently. I wonder who's gonna captain the Flying Dutchman now.....
Tonight is going to be one of those nights.
Lol I should probably get name tags for #rumdiarieshouseparty tomorrow ..."drink so much youll forget your name"
and my copy of the book preordered didn't DL to my kindle accnt... Need to investigate.
I didn't think getting away could clear your mind this much, definitely needed this trip.
Oh! Well I put on a soft taco and I wrap into a burrito. So I always get yelled at cause I put lil bit to much for them to wrap it
We had a 125-word mention in "Neighbors" on Friday, May 4. Take a look if you haven't seen it!
So wish I could, but I have singing commitments here in Boston! One of these days... toi toi toi!
I absolutely love going to sleep to the cutest goodnight texts && waking up to the sweet goodmorning texts !! They can make my day & nite❤😘
He dons...the hat. THE hat.
We cannot wait for coming to Charlotte!! Who's going?
having athletics 1st period should be illegal.
Today's Goal: Get unfortunate songs stuck in people's heads. First up: Little Suzi from Tesla.
Shout out to and for following...its much appreciate! Check them out guys :)
Had a pretty good practice :) ; Just feeling a bit blah
rereading Seneca's 88th epistle on the Liberal Arts. Note to self: accuse people of being "ravenous takers of emetics" more often.
And William Hurt's sure as hell no Sam Elliott.
Bell's Oberon is now available at France 44
What I really think is sexy Intelligent Black Men who value the right things in life & don't adhere to ignorance of rappers & other stuff
OH WOW. OH WOW. OH WOW.
Search for Evidence of Wildlife on Your Hike
happy to share brother...lots of hidden gems on that site
Only four hours today...let make some money!!!
Yesturday a hobo came up to me nd ask me for change to buy a beer. So I gave him money for his beer
RT : Here's how #gf Forkly users can best spread the word about #glutenfree dishes to other users :...
I wish I could call my dog.
AP gov done!! AP lang and comp tomorrow and I'M DONE!! (For this year)
Hopefully Leahs is almost done too. I hate when my baby girl doesnt feel good.
How about I spend my night ranking Claire Denis movies? Why not?
lol... I will ask management later on today
Happy St. Patrick's Day, by the way. No one loves storytelling like the Irish!
Men forget but never forgive. Women forgive but never forget.
Good Morrow Jen.. May your day Be As Quickly as it began as you awakened from your slumber
I hope not :P And what in the name of Jesus are PuddingPoints?
Amy Ames Moves Up to #11 on Country & Western Music Radio Show Radio Beiaard 106.3 FM Presented by Al Van Dam
#LocalUnderground Tent Party - wine, beer, food, & live music. The tent is warm & dry with elbow room!
My school would probably have bearly any!!
Judge says to Mercy, "I finally gave you something you wanted. I feel like all I do is say no to you." lol. Mercy thinks to herself, as long
noodles and company or subway hum
RT : As you celebrate end of 2011 & the start of a great 2012, don't drink & drive we want to tweet with you far into '12 & beyond
Some people develop a wishbone where their back bone should be.
Thanks, Neha! For both donating AND spreading the word! :)
RT Turd #2 to Meg flushing over 80 million $ on crappy campaign. Oh what that $ COULD have done!
The Ugly Truth
usually no blood draw at scene, breath instead. Don't think detects THC. Never comes up here, no law re pot amt in system
Heyy shorty!! Hope all is well with you! Congrats!
are u from of SODMG??
Dang were hot together tonight. I hope you keep doing more acting, you are wasted behind the camera.
not to brag, but the crippling self-doubt and social awkwardness I wore in high school still fits
very sweet!
pussy fake ass bitch
*I'm DTV
this will be my third night staying up :/ I practically feel like a zombie.
Great to hear it! Let us know if you have any questions or need any help. We are always here if you need us!
NOW I get it! The light dawns. Earth rise. (Or is that the alien ship? Wait -- I didn't say that. No --NBC, I didn't. Really,)
We need to look at people around us, they r our community
Volunteering at today and I'm so inspired by the students who put it together. Oh yeah, and the AMAZING speakers.
can you follow
Linkage Award Inductee KEN BOOTHE
We read it for book club. I liked it a lot more than I was anticipating, you should read it.
Ever feel uneasy about something but you can't quite but your finger on it...
Most effective Landing Pgs have Zen-like simplicity & desired call-to-action should naturally arise out of this background of stillness.
Super awesome. Wish I had everything they ever did on vinyl.
i'm with ya!
love it!
hey!!!!!!!!!!!!!1 i know i miss the drama on bedford ave..lmao im in cali at the moment still living in bk
There's nothing worse than telling a mother their son is being chased by the police on Mothers day..good shot boy smh.
Wass So Bombb At VMA's. He's coming to WA, for concert in 3 dayss!
To live is so startling it leaves little time for anything else
Wow. Church sermon spoke straight to my heart tonight. Might go again in the morning to experience it again.
RT : So Much Gwalla, MONEY! MONEY! MONEY!
Love this quote: "There is no point at which you can say, "Well, I'm successful now. I might as well take a nap." Carrie Fisher
and more! :) RT : You deserve the best.
Who's Here has natural straight white teeth!
My day was crazy y'all wouldn't believe it...trust me
good you better not be
: For now, it's still safe to Rickroll
Reviews you can use—from actual diners. No trolls allowed!
Damn mee too!
today was an amazing day. Thank God i got to be with my bestfriends. the 2 hour bus rides, the insiders, matching bracelets. it was PERF.💜
thanks for the follow anything you need in los angeles we got you
lol whatever. I'm not THAT obsessed. Its more like an infatuation...
Trust me a girl like you will have and deserve the best man. Inshallah sooner than later
Good weekend with the boyfriend <3
....about 40 minutes.
Mindless behavior is taking over ;)
Thank you so much, Mike! I just heard the same thing on Facebook.
awesome so far gonna work on it more tonight! :)
"that anyone could EVER have."
RT Did you know that we serve happy hour all day on Mondays in the bar? Come enjoy some delicious bites & tasty cocktails!
damn that is nice
FINALLY FREE!! Now cleaning all day then cardinal game tonight !
Our lives have become one big enter net access ip address and key words it's more but i'll stop at that facebook it
Can barely move at the mall..This place is packed
Just noticed she is having a 
i have a headache:\
preciate it. I'm gonna make it happen.
MAYTE YOUR CAT JUST TRIED TO BITE ME
Stan Lee at Wizard World???!!
If its not one thing its another.
that's sick
#1 reason: "she seems to have more strikes against her than a bowling alley at Fenway Park"
Y'all can't handle it
I'm surrounded by (fellow) geeks!
eh, I used to be a Mormon. They don't take compliments well. Or polygamy laws.
Hell yeah! RT: : Listening to before I go into work.
No access to the closed captioning in Connect?
you are not the only fan that hasn't met him and you will get your chance :-)
well the new episode starts in like 3 min! Watch it bitch! ;) lol.
More sarcasm! How do you come up with this stuff!? Too good!
This conversation has been a real game-changer.
I need my to come cuddle with me and make me feel better.
Bring back Mr Easy Rider lol
What could be better than prepping tax docs & viewing #EPL on a Saturday morning? #Bolton 1 v #QPR 0 (1) Well done, Tim Ream, on the assist!
So pissed right now. 😡
controlled reaction is always the most intelligent...say it to yourself 3 times before you flipout see if that helps.
golf cart accident :(
Awesome. When will you guys be in Austin?
I think he was pissed I was taking a picture of his pink, skinny, tie.
The band that I'm listening to right now sucks. And it's awesome.
But that video was GOOD
wow. Its actually very very unusual to NOT get on when it has adequate funding
Rant over...sorry everyone...just pisses me off at how rude some people can be...even with children involved
Adele is giving me EVERYTHING right now!!! "...Rolling in the deep"
you my friend. ARE AMAZINGLY TALENTED.
RT : Truly outrageous that 99% of the cookies are consumed by 1% of the monsters on PBS.
Thank you so much!! Show us around? <3
in toggle_visibility(), change visibile -> visible -- safari/chrome might default to vis.?
Twisting at Rubin and Thompson Assisted Living 50 Houston Ave Saugus, Ma. from 1-3pm for a Thanksgiving open house.
Where are you fellas?
Victoria's Secret fashion show tonight......whos in?
I hate my fuckin life
But why does this girl in study think she can sing like The Band Perry.....
#whatayear I have had some good times and some bad but I'm just blessed to have lived 2011 going out with a bang
My high of seeing my #BCEagles win their 3rd national championship in 5 years has worn off enough that I'm sad that the season is now over.
Riding through Mandeville and thought of you It's so clean, has THE freshest air and beautiful homes.
shut up. Only the birds on the joint hurt. I'll just laugh at you on Thursday then.
Matthew! Glad I got to meet ya. Wish the game would've been more eventful for the Braves.
aw. you're such a great brother. love you D!
planning for the trip to mainland China end of the month! Any suggestions?
This Oshkosh construction struggles
the Americans in the front.
you need to call me right now
What's up with these movies coming out that only give the holiday not the date for release? I have a hard enough time with my own bday!!
OK, so had to take a mulligan on the last codebase. That said, Dev Team 3 just finished our scoring prototype, which is the core of the app.
A bathroom would be nice right about now
#relationshipsendbecause of a refusal to compromise...
I Miss and together they where perfect together..
Off to make my brother a sandwich :p
6-120% Locks available for Thursday. Get all 6 for $30 or 3 for $15. Email to get it started
I guess I'm shit out of luck
You got blocked for that, MOB? Damn LOL.
I'm recording it!!!!! We can watch it when you're home ;-) xozo
Share your beautiful photos and artwork with us!
Today's wrkout was a beyotch! Proud of you E. for sticking through even though your shoulder is busted! Nyway, end'n the nite w/ futurama :)
Steve Stricker just made double bogey on No.10. Now 7 over on round, +6 overall. In danger of missing the cut. Ouch.
good call, those for sure too! m
Please no "edged weapons/tools". This means hatchets, swords, knives etc.
#Baller well congrats !
Ed and Taylor's song is gonna be perfection omg
Thanks for the RT, Hope you're enjoying the winter sunshine this weekend!
wow it really does sound like hair! i can't figure out how to record wind... is mimicking the only solution?
Almost on the T R bridge!!!
hi how u doing?
All I can say is try getting a job in the current job market without one. Try a Tech School, less $$.
im sorry! Im going to go see the new harry potter and go to dave and busters with my sis :)
I got tree lmao
I live very close to there. A lot of activity.
It is so heartbreaking to hear about Junior Seau's death at such a young age. Thoughts are with his family and the SD Chargers.
For the followback i can return the lighter..www.realniggazdorealthangz.com
who am i kidding, i won't get anything done today
if only I lived n London/Uk I would totally go. <3
Congratulations! What's next?
your right! there is no need to count down for Tuesday
Sitting with the most precious grandson, who's the stud of the NICU in St Vincent's Hospital in Indy!
were just good.
on the bus lo im bored and i have a full batterie on my phone for one lol
whenever will be fine. We will all be there. Whatever works for u
Peyton manning should be the Jackie Moon of the Indianapolis Colts. Player, Owner, Coach.
it's for real!
Aammmaaaazzzaannggg 👉👉👉👉 cool follower.
love your place! Wish you had masala chai!
i didn't send yu off
My Brand is getting bigger by the day!!!
It's true. I'm stll just a midwestern state with coastal ambitions.
Just found a reason Germans better than Spanish. Siri speeches German, not Spanish!
I know, I felt a lot of love from Chris and Brad
yeah, it seems as if there's never any good news....that's life though I guess.
Woot!!! Go, go, go!! #DFWRhinos RT : 422 words left to cross the 50k finish line for the first time in my life.
thanks for sticking us on your locals list; nice blog btw!
Yep. Year 2 at You-Dub! I'll have to check out #phdchat. Gotta some people willing to write my exams and dissertation for me!
when do you get in?
I wish I didn't legit sound like a dog barking every time I have indigestion or the hiccups.
#GoTribe But I was getting better. Now ima go back to my original assholeness
If you express your love on the Feb 14th what do you express on the other 364 days in the year?
Recruiting strong retail mktg mgr w/ social media, e-commerce or trade show background. DM me for details.
lol right i love it!
Almost forgot to sign my agreement for my class on the 21st. Camera, Speed ACTION! an insider's secrets to the real world of acting
just ordered it. Always get the cask ale if available.
Can't wait to go play Capture the Flag with ! See you on Sigma Sigma Commons!
"Kids: if you want to Nail Rick Perry" I stopped reading at this point, because the answer must always be NOT NO, BUT HELL NO.
DATS HOW I FEEL ABT MY MOM U ONLY GET 1LUV HER N RESPECT HER WIT UR ALL BCUZ I KNOW I DO
Between that and something bad I ate earlier in the day, it was not a good evening for me.
Open bar at liquid pool.... getting my drink on...
I can only imagine. It would be insanely crazy!
Lesson for the day: Don't punch cars. You end up with a seriously fucked up hand.
I do like this - great, great find - thx - and I have read some of that book - he's phenomenal - will pick it back up :)
Hello Friday!
Have a safe and enjoyable weekend everyone!
How come no one begs me for retweets I'm way cooler then most of these shmuck "celebrities"
good luck Alex, hope you find a spot to catch on in the NFL
I'm a virtual friend! :p haha
yea totally agree
Happy Friday :-)
Another triple double
Tonight is date night! ...but not before I have to wait a billion hours for the cable guy to fix our box!:(
If I were opening a walk-in clinic, I'd do it in an old Borders store and call it...ready...Doctors Without Borders!
Honest criticism is hard to take, particularly from a relative, a friend, an acquaintance, or a stranger.
You over the age of 18 and burning out at a 7-Eleven = Your cojones have not fully developed yet.
there you go! :D
After 25 years together, my uncles were legally married today in Iowa!
just started an arc for Albert Borris' CRASH INTO ME -- a 2k9 colleague. I really like his spare style.
I love that video!
that was the stupidest thing I've heard all night!
Thanks for mentioning us in your publication!!
The world would run a lot smoother if more men knew how to dance
Just bc spell check reverts to telecom, doesn't mean that is the correct term. It's telecon people! Short for teleconference.
On my way to Boston, plane to North Carolina in the morning...omg majorly overpacked lol
Appreciate the love bro
USING THE PHRASE "KEEP'N IT #1HUNNIT" WONT MAKE YOUR IMMATURE ACTIONS ACCEPTABLE. U SHOULD ALWAYS TRY & BETTER YOUR PERSONA
well did hear the one where the mom screamed? (: that was me & my mom!
wishing that just for today, the kitties could go into work instead of me.
Thanks to Ford i spend more time with my car than my boyfriend. He'll get over it
Foundations for Marketing Research assignment..
You were my best friend. Yeah, not anymore!!
My paycheck has been deposited in my account! I'm buying' some shit!! 😃💰
Thanks love! aka Carl aka honey badger ;) Oh wait....... hahah
Catherine McNeela gives us tools to put in our toolbox for interpreting and acting the song.
They played their hearts out n the loss n the semi-finals. I take full credit 4 that 1. We didnt have a legit offense 4 that type of defense
yes :D
Guess the exact weight of your U-Swirl today and it's on the house for Weigh In Wednesday!
I just want to go home.
This blows. The Braves bullpen is going to mow down the Pirates hitters.
superbowl hangover? Hahaha you Bears fans are delusional.
Wednesday or Thursday. That cool?
GET SOME FUCKING HEADPHONES
I whip my hair back and forth! Whip it real good! I whip my hair back and forth! Just whip it!
So my heart jumps a little when i talk to you, it doesn't mean anything d;
i hate it when your watching a show and it ends on a great, interesting part<<<<
LMAO RT : I hate when people point out my typos. Bitch, you look like a typo!
Congrats D. Durham!!! #sx first supercross win!!
is a lame ass lard & he does not go hard...<3 love youu bud. :))
hey your tweets r funny Lmfaoo :D
Just a brief check-in: am in Mpls now for work this week, and so far, it is absolutely the right place for me to be right now.
||_|!| THE CRUNKEST PARTY ON A SATURDAY NIGHT SEE THE PICTURES --> WWW.G1PARTY.COM
#Happy30thBeyonce too bad you weren't going into labor on labor day, but good luck with the baby <3
LOVE spring daylight savings. 4 mile run after work is much less painful than before.
's boyfriend video was so perfect
thank you, we realized we have been hacked and are spreading the word to let people know. Appreciate the DM.
Awh. I Love Hollie. But I'm Happy That Philip Went Through!
Finding out there is a chipotle in Chicago seriously made my whole weekend.
Tweet tweet like a bird.
But just cuz I want Boston to win the series don't mean I want them to win easy. I want everyone else to go to Game 7 while we just sweep.
Justin: "Together we can make history!" Beliebers: "And babies" ONLY BELIEBERS!! 3 people follow me right now please. :)
I've got a lot of things to think about..
I miss you, monkeyface!
oooooohhhh now what happened with im???
I was today talking shop w/ Building for schools/teachers/kids. Helpful to hear from ppl targeting your same market.
"Lars shouldn't you be watching the kids?""ahh we're using the body system""body system?""yes.....BODY!!!!!!""oh buddy"
What is her famous song called?
I'll give it a try. Thanks.
BOB DID YOU GET A PUPPY?
": Getting ready to speak at Georgia State University!"
RT : Once someone is identified as a rep of athletics interests (Booster), they retain that identity forever.
RT“: Full moon looks great on the waves of Lake Michigan tonight, I'm tempted to jump right in after my meeting with D.A. today.”
your profile picture is fantabulous
alright bro tonight first night of radio school for me.
RT A growing number of journalists are getting it: solar is getting cheap, solar can scale, blogs.telegraph.co.uk/...
Yes! That would be great
Great day. I'm going to do whatever I want.
Shut up you know I'm still mad
So if you took all the sperm from the major new wave bands ala Twins and then that baby was raised by hipsters you get Neon Indian
Like metals, mesh, migration. Holes in the earth. Open onto several directions.
Follow the crew and a sick producer
Today's a good day 👊💡
I still don't know how visited during Badger Hate Week and survived.
Hawks win 4-1 and close out the Western Conference Finals in 4 games!!! Totally awesome
Did you know I have a replica #dress from the #Titanic #Movie which is numbered? It will be in undetermined.
Keep doing what you do and please reach out to our youth, I feel they will listen to you. We, and they need your guidance.
It's the season for summer picnics and graduation parties. Let us take care of everything so you can enjoy the event.
Last year we spent Mother's Day at Lasertron. Am thinking this year we go see Avengers again :)
Worst part is when you try to wipe it off it looks like u collided with an ice cream truck :D
Jackson Pollock~ The painting has a life of its own. I try to let it come through.
4 hours till takeoff!!!!
we go live in 2012 Email me at Would love to see what you do and maybe look to align.
Damnit. Come back soon then!
Grant application mailed, now back to client work. Best Wishes to All!
nahh i lose my accent but when ever i go back for a while it comes back 
you were unbelieveable at the Grammy's and deserve every 1 of those awards!
GO RANGERS Buster :D
only football
what is this 2 nites now i cant watch any videos because of this tubemogul what is it ?
cant get this david banner/chris brown song out my head
YOUR VOICE IS SO CUTE<3
HI TOP
58.24 400M dash today, not bad for a 34 year old...is a sub 2:00 800 by the end of 2012 possible?
"Never chase them, quickly replace them. mistakes ? i don't retrace them. i just move on and mentally erase them.”
Finished off yesterday with some fun "cutting and pasting," making phased boxes. Added some levity to that sorrowful manuscript work.
Chris Matthews just ripped Santorum for his Dominionism and Theocracy! Way to go Chris
don't knock it til yah try it
pizza and martini's, its like im in college already xD
caution signs @ key spots on the route. I saw 3 folks go down, in < 5 min, at that 1st or 2nd RR X-ing in Natick/Framingham
i love you.
Lesson: Life=People. Life is time with people we love ~ Jim Collins
1-Enrollment 2-Developmental Education Placement 3-Progress 4-Transfer & Completion 5-Workforce Prep & Employment Outcomes
Entomology kit ordered for the boy, girls' horse photos ordered for competition, dinner is cooking. Imaginary ponies are still impressed.
soon! soon! in july, no? is no party w/o you!
got to meet the good peeps ! much love fam
Someone needs to start a parody twitter account for 's hair;
Don't find fault, find a remedy. -Henry Ford
bye issac do u follow
I can see it , it just looks funny .
Discussion at about "gray" vs. "grey". How do we decide? Exact match search volume + insights
It is sad but not surprising 2 hear the NEPHEW of Senator James Inhofe was instrumntal n the planned 'racist' AD agnst Pres Obama
discussing the structure of a #git repository - commits, branches, versions
I ain't nobody though. I don't know what I'm talking about
I've totally done the same thing before! It's terrible! but mine faded pretty quick and no one was the wiser...
ITS HOTT OUT HERE!! BUT TODAY IS FRIDAY PARTY TIME!!
No one can possibly achieve any real and lasting success or get rich in business by being a conformist. - Jean Paul Getty
Great series, huh?! How was Chicago?
Jason Bay!
how was the last #dctweetup? I was sad to miss it! Looked SO fun :)
Earthquake! What a crazy feeling.
Cool. I wear Nike training shoes for classes, but have to run in Asics. May have to try Nike running for Zumba & Crossfit.
Saw 'Jiro Dreams of Sushi' last night. Wow. That man is amazing. Can't wait to meet him in the depths of the Tokyo subway.
In a very thankful mood this morning - thank yous all around!
I'd say more that Prezi highlights problems also there in PPT/KN: visuals as secondary, absence of design & media consciousness
dude that's crap. That redirected me too'best college advisor'
you guys are amazing. <3
What if Jessie's Girl was Stacey's Mom?
we could have a code red situation on our hands..please say youll come to the rescue tonight!
I just paid $4.09 per gallon for gas. That's a first.
do u have. Textplus account? Cuz there is a guy claiming to b u on there. Just want to make sure he is a fake b4 I report him
follow back? Please!
Lebron is no Jordan Magic Bird or even Kobe he does not have the will to win that can carry a team when needed
yes, I'm doing ok. Baby is doing great. How is brandon? Did I got his name right?
PUT A BLOCK ON LOVE....RUN WHEN ITS NEAR...JS...DONT LOVE ME!....
damn I hated planet! Should go to mei! It's like 10 feet from your house
Post all and any videos you have of Sugarland to show them our SUPPORT!
I'm just loving the comments.
A bus back-up to start a brisk Monday morning? Focus on the good run earlier, Peter. Your office will be there when you get to it.
RT "Tempted to drive to this afternoon to hang out on the terrace. #spring" I would definitely join u if I wasn't in LV!
just got myself a new job #makinbank <3
So the guy i met that I tweeted about the other day... I saw him again last night hahaha.... :)
Oh danm somebody took yo bitch
Raw Elements USA is the conscious consumers answer to serious, safe sun protection.
Forgot how much I LOVE birthdays!!! So blessed and happy :) could not ask for better friends and family!! 💋💙☺🎉🎈🎈🎁
damn wish I could have been there, live it up for me tonight bro
Great night for patio dining! Let us know your favorite outdoor patio spot in #Albuquerque :)
This 1800 man
Out of softball practice. Needs to get some #food!!! : )
this game is looking like ny vs. mia, SMDH.
I really do hope to hear back from very soon with interest in keynote speaking :))
haha yeah I usually ignore it but I thought why not? :D
RT : The 9 to 5 Cure - great read for anyone committed to creating a flexible work/life.
Check out for your Red Dress Party needs! We have a wide variety of sizes and styles + love to be a safer place to shop!
My Galaxy Nexus runs ICS. I like it, tho it reboots spontaneously. Looking forward to the coming OS upgrade.
I know you love me babe(;.
Stoked that from stopped by office today to interview us for a write-up next week!
There's definitely rain n the air n Atlanta. If ur outside u better finish what ur doing by nightfall.
Take time out of your day to thank God for all that you have
It'll be* okay
he's relevant in the same way Skip Bayless is: spews controversial garbage to keep his name on people's minds.
Donations can be made to Japan Earthquake and Pacific Tsunami relief by texting REDCROSS to 90999 for a $10 donation
": #Bachelor and #Bachelorette should have their own awards!What Else? #Bachys" It should be considered under BEST DRAMA EVER!!
- We can't wait to have you back!! You looked like you were having a great time! :)
your mini vacation is over I take it?
your conclusion on prison and politics was profound! I'm clapping in my bed,just scared the dog.
2 hours early to my pst go navy
Cut Copy at #p4kfest is the answer to Daft Punk at Lollapalooza. The crowd is ready to esplode.
Stinky fruit??!!! Can't wait for them to cut into that!!
justin bieber is calling girls now! .. one every night ! check www.call-justinbieber.com RT !
Iron Steakhouse in Land Park. Much improved and very good.
random music recommendations have me feeling a surge of inspiration, why is it not 5 yet?
And even if you have failed at all else in the eyes of the world, if you have a loving family, you are a success. --Og Mandino
Don't know her, but love your mom.
The have had a winning record on the road...15 seasons in a row. How about them apples?
this is me , I can’t even keep my eyes open !
Come see Volture. Doors are already open!
Pfizer rep says sometimes initial ideas don't play out and too many times compounds sit on shelves or in a freezer, now they have a chance.
Messi's third
This weather calls for a great day
Hope all you FAC Heads had a great day! Stop on by tomorrow for our edible special! Donate for one, get the second 1/2 off!! See ya then!!
Eating a cookie dough blizzard !
Oh why hello, hello life I've always wanted. I see you've decided to start becoming reality...
guess Jose Mourinho is kicking himself for earlier comments, huh? Will be an interesting final for sure!
wuzzz up dude
If I had the chance to hurt you, like you did to me, I wouldn't take it.
Laying in bed, feeling like shit. Woo!
That's over wrking the muscles... Not safe my dear.
Just got tickets for Shecky's...yay
I'm great how's your summer (Coach) Jasmine!?(:
it's a poor sailor who learns his/her craft on calm seas.
whats good - what kind of tracks you looking for
Oh man. That was a close one.
cool, one of the top engneers in the city, have yo sounding right.
There's been a guy on my bus holding a Tom Brady picture. He's done in for three days in a row. I'm confused.
#VoicesILove Usher- You make me wanna
Why are people saying R.I.P 2009-2012? Nobody said that they broke up...? They're amazing no matter what..[S]army
An artist never really finishes his work, he merely abandons it.
Tip #207: When you try to FORCE someone to do something, it can affect their ACTIONS... but it rarely affects their HEART.
Brently forgetting diesel for the compressor.
thanks for the retweet!!
Can you elaborate?
Orgasms for science!
3 developer challenges: refine our skill set, preserve ideals &share what you know, says
I've been working on it on and off since Feb. It's a very rough draft, mind you.
"How great is the love the Father has lavished on us, that we should be called children of God! And that is what we are!" 1 John 3:1
I have no idea what that means, but see you tonight!
Drug dumpoff, gun buyback
Let's get this Monday over with
Just try using #twitter today. #football #signingday #guys have it locked up. LOL #politics to
partying :D
thanks! tell your friends! we haven't been down that way in over a year and a half.
you'll just be watching Tebow sittin in the bench. He can't stay on the field.
Stripper booty with a rack like woww
Touched the ground for the first time ever in plow pose tonight! #yoga Must have been the #pilates pre-work.
Our Johnny B Gouda may sell out today. Get it while you can!
#20ThingsAboutMe I fiercely over think.
Holperin recall will be decided on how voters feel about him leaving state in Feb.
Follow me so I can inbox you.
ok, but whats gone happen to me, curious..
It's Topanga's aka 's bday! In her honor everyone should watch Boy Meets World on MTV2 and have a
where is your car?
what happened? Status?
you're so welcome! Those kids were so excited to meet you, I'm so glad it happened.
#InCaseYouDidntKnow I appreciate you.......
I wasn't paying attention to u as usual lol :P
Thanks, Tony! I'm aiming for 46 days in a row so I've got a long way to go, but so far this has been a good start.
But first I need to get through this ^%&^* semester :)
I'd love to get a blog and/or wiki started. Need staff to do it + more time!
okay! I love her!
Are they holding a special feature on recruiting violations?
Smoothie sounds good right about now
this day was ok even tho i didn't get to go where i wanted to
I have yet to receive an iTunes gift card. I need more money
EarthLink Offering Cloud, Security Services Bundles Through Channel - CRN
Welcome to the Vikings! We're excited to have you!
oh i thought the same thing and i'm about to make him go away lol
it's about as real as 's
"Criticial" (i.e., crucial): Guess it depends if the research will benefit the researcher's field of interest.
I just love this wonderful,kind,awesome singer named Selena Gomez
Going on 15 hours and still going strong.
Oh, and a #FF to my brother-in-law and great attorney!
WOW IT GOES DOWN IN PITTSBURGH PA NIGGAZ IS GETTING CAUGHT WIT BOMBS IN DA HOOD NO BS DAT SHIT CRAY
Audition for Suburgatory today... Thank you Tim Payne! Just getting in the room is a win.
You deserved every word. The Color Purple is magnificent.
you know it's a good day when you pack SPF & a sunhat in your day's bag. #halfday #nephew #sunshine (cc: )
many thanks! RT : #FF for those who make Indy the best.
happy developers write more innovative code (Matt Zumwalt, #or09) i'm going to bake them some brownies...
I will bring you guys our leftover table top barrels. Then it will be aging instead of sitting.
Halloween is the one night a year when a girl can dress up like a total slut and no other girls say anything about it
That was in most of my reading last semester; still couldn't tell you what it means.
References to awesome things, though! I dunno, I totally got sucked in, even beyond the refs. Maybe you didn't play enough D&D?
“: Thank you to the weird kids that texted me today saying "I see you."” <<<That's ironic
Getting over someone is the hardest thing to do but you have to sometime or another.
Spy photos, sure thing
When people touch my feet <<<< #footphobia ❌👟
Yeah and I've been too lazy to re-dye it XD
who u goin wit
Just had a lunch-date with playwright/screenwriter Janine Salinas to discuss our new short film Dulce's Ashes!
First pumpkin bread of the season is in the oven! M ...
Tattoo being fixed soon :)
NP jazz music started as an Afro American aesthetic and was embraced by others and now is played by the world.
Play some Ferry
Z Time for a nap. Are you a big fan of the "Ciesta?" I must nap or I can't function.
meh, nothing important, just annoying!
Miss America 2012 where are the women judges
Out of al of our pictures together, you choose that one. WHY?
Check out this month's Inc. Magazine. We're an Inc. 5000 honoree & among the fastest growing private companies in America!!
ok cuz I felt that you didn't fools with your boy
Thoughts & prayers going out to Va. Tech community. Another shooting tragedy today. Senseless.
I think we have Mitt Romney's 2012 slogan.
Filippo Pozzato: I wasted my talent for too long
Are we going to remove the words holocaust and enslavement from books now because they evoke unpleasant feelings
#schools Bullying Prevention Tip #5 - CHALLENGE students to NOT be By-Standers..students involved in helping peers about the issue.
SHOUTOUT PLEASE LOVE YOU
My phone tried to autocorrect "cafes" into "cages." Well, that conversation almost got awkward...
Loving someone so much you do everything you can to make them happy <3
Early flight this AM. TPA-DTW-IND. Busy week ahead, then Pittsburgh and NYC next week.
Fun week marketing. Now time to tackle my screenplay this weekend. Come on, script. Let's do this!
You just made me feel like a
#thechew is all about cheese today, I'm stoked
OUT: Swedish Fish. IN: Aqua Life.
man I wish I was in the b so I could get some with you!
I only asked permission to tweet, and since they're minors, not sure what the rule is for publishing
Wrapped Intl Conf on Future #Holocaust Testimonies at W. Galilee College in Israel! Tks 2 Ghetto Fighters' House Museum, Partnership 2Gether
My favorite part of graduating? Finally having the opportunity to read all the books I actually WANT to read.
Is it wrong to believe in the resiliance of the human spirit.
Every time I pass a hot guy on campus, I wanna say "I don't normally dress like a bum" but then I realize that I DO always wear yoga pants.
The only rapper i really look up to is my brother young chi.Grind effort and dream is crazy.S/O
I know, right? Fear Street books were the best!
today would be the best day ever if you followed or retweeted me! 22 days till boyfriend!!7
thanks to for coming out tonight!
how is dat..
Kind of unclear to me that Judge's role is material...
Lmfao , tell him he has genital herpes . ^__^
WOW my birthday is in 2 days haha
Spent afternoon trying to manage multiple blogs, emails and twitter names. I need to streamline my identity. Should have made banana bread
Our mission: 1. to reduce # of homeless pets in Oh
North London Wedding Flowers Specialists Pinks Weddings Launch New Website
#OccupyJax General Assembly meets today at 4pm, Community Garden group meeting at 5pm, both by the City Hall.
Damn 2000 tweets. What a "twittererbox" makes me feel like a lil belieber. & oh btw I still luv u ;)
Ballard High School's Homecoming Football Game is Friday October 15 @ Memorial Stadium-want to join us?
tonight at !! Get excited tonights gonna be a good night!
FUCK Twitter... I'm out...
Listening to Andy Sheppard, Michel Benita, Sebastian SPACEWALK, PART 2 - sci fi new age jazz? IT ROCKS!
Get out to tomorrow at in Pontiac! It's gonna be a riot!8pm $12 in advance $14/d
Thanks for the RT Eddie!
Relaxing in bed. Survived another day of speech class :/ so tired :( speeches are kinda scary & being nervous is exhausting. Gn.
We can't offer any discounts when the bats are on MAP, sorry. But you will definitely get free shipping!!
“I am interested in art as a means of living a life; not as a means of making a living.” ~Robert Henri
haha dude that video is hella funny i was crackin up
You think ignoring all your problems will make everything better?
Dudes be talking shit
Just added a new Twitter tab! Now you can follow all of our tweets straight from facebook. OR find us on Twitter !
miss my bestfriend! :/
enjoy the most u can :) it's not going to be that fun tomorrow when the pain starts ;) lol
Scott Decksheimer (sdecksheimer) thanks for the follow.
Thank to for following. Have a good afternoon.
Big stop by Rutgers, Louisville turns it over on downs at mid-field
where are you dt?
The only thing more boring than a strings concert is a chorus concert full of songs I've never heard before in my entire life.
RT this if you feel like spending all day in bed...and also if you feel like drinking more whiskey later tonight!
I co-sign that!!! RT : When one door closes, another 1 opens !
Excited for tonight: featuring ! I'll be there with will YOU be?
Mommas got it!
Nothing:/ I'm just watching AGT! What about you? (:
TRAFFIC ALERT: I-90 EB - RIGHT LANE WILL BE CLOSED NEAR MM 163 (EDGERTON) DUE TO A VEHICLE FIRE. USE CAUTION.
it's customary for shoe companies to test future shoes in all black/white...he must like them. Good for adidas.
Thanks for the follow.
Don’t focus on the problem, focus on the solution! This is taken from one of the #SwordofTruth series. Easier said than done. Any advice?
Maybe try adding "lyrics" to your query next time...? That might weed out SOME of the stuff you didn't want to see....
Agreed! We have the same problem listing from home and the office. Definitely thinking about it for the next release!
fuckin cunts blew the game. now hope needs to blow me.. hahhaha
i have played my fav song for 3 hours straight
It's been a year since started Immaculatize.com. He is considering following his own advice sometime soon.
It's Gala Day!
hm well.
i love justin ciz his music helped me trough rough times and he gave me the feeling i am loved.
Im writting a song... lyrics and a piano accompaniment
Congratulations Team Triple Crown win girls 18U. Vivianne and Kaitlynn
Ooh baby give me one more chance (I want u back)
Let me get where Im going...
#1stAnniversaryAustin so proud i will always love you <3
Txs for update. RT : author says he misspoke and it will be out next week
Homework <tv.
Checking him out Now. Thanks.
! it's your lion
Earthquake in D.C. Wow!
Thanks for the talk today, looking forward to my first World this year!
#twittermarriage for sure
will be watching tonight! can't wait! =D
RT : ANYONE can be a fan of ANYTHING. There are no rules. <- And no two people HAVE to like the same thing.
Nothing , U ?
thanks man - u are very welcome. So good to have you out there!
If you're an entertainment lawyer who can pitch a project to networks please get a hold of me
cute text.
yeah I need to work there.
Happy to follow thanks for following me!
Obviously Worlds Peace did not intend to hit Harden or anyone else. He was just celebrating.
lololololol. Are you in wrestling for club day?
#EveryoneHasThat1Friend that is always tryna ride for free
every technology, new or old has its place ;)
More Vinyl in stock in Amoeba Gold vinyl...limited edition..
Woo get to see tonight!!💗
I've had enough of this concrete jungle
NWS has issued a Severe Thunderstorm Watch for Butler, Clarke, Coffee, Conecuh, Covington, Crenshaw, Dale, Escambia, Geneva, Henry, Houston,
we are launching in Nashville and want to get you guys on the site! Lets fix some cars together!
Go follow the fam He a Real Nigga and support Our #KrewsMusic !
bout to watch a movie!
my simple compliment: your thoughtful perspective helps broaden mine. thank you!
Wanna go practice #Karate in the garage?
Chasing Red trailer within the week.
Tanks! Much appreciated.
Everything I eat hurts my stomach. Dr tomorrow. Happy to be back on steady land, but I feel like I am dizzy and swaying still.
I've concluded that I'll never be able to run 13.1 miles in one day.
somehow im in a good mood
RT my last post to enter contest. Not the 3 days left post. Computer will generate the winner MAY 15th launch day. Thanks
I hear you on that!!!
Thanks so much for following us ..any allergies bothering you!? ;) Happy Tuesday!
-thanks for mention! Always appreciate the quality articles. Have a great weekend!
"Excuse me. Is this the back of the line? No, it’s the front of the line and we’re all standing backwards. Oooe!’ - Dice Clay
Just accepted an offer for a job that exceeds my expectations. As of February 8th I will no longer be unemployed! What a blessing from God.
Thank you to all my listeners, You've inspired me to keep writing.
alright I'm just go an watch now. Contacts out and everything. Live Tweet session?
Wonderful! RT : FOUND: Family of the lost elderly woman in Marathon, FL they're on their way to pick her up!
hey devendra! INNOVATE!!!! is awesome!
Ush! some people are so dumb!!
quit tweeting dumb sayings
OH my, math city?.. I look up to you Malcolm!
hey hey lil sissie daya~ good morning~ love you always & forever my dear lil sis~ have a zentastic day and take care <3
Until you get to school and everything's blocked. Haha.
How To Buy!
April has been a really eventful month :P
northern lights.
Happy for the broncos though
Reaction of instructor abt "things that go wrong"--the unexpected--can get students engaged. Excitement/curiosity is contagious.
Make Your Friday Better!!
RT : Happiness is a choice.
Working out of the studio today....
“: “Design is not synonymous with creativity.” /by ”
um yes it is !
Great fight, i love it
Awesome - thank you!
I've done no marketing/PR for my latest album yet... still deciding what to spend on. Thx for the lead. Is that your music?
Thanks for the follow. Loving your Santa Monica facility!!
Wow!! just said "He would take Rogers over any other QB in the #NFL, even Peyton,Brees,and Brady.
I'm cooking a big ole fancy dinner. I'm all wife-like today, ha! I hope I don't burn the hell out of it!
Hey, those Serbs should teach DC on how to pass a real budget, especially one that targets the deficit.
RT if you love gummy vitamins :)
Coming 2gether of #ows & #teaparty is GOP/Wall Street worst fear. What we have in common-corruption of our politicians by banks/oil/wealthy
Clayton Kershaw for Cy Young Award!!!
Lots more South Jersey reviews coming up soon, too...there may be some more names you will recognize.
votes are in for . amazing tonight!! can't believe he has gone this long without being discovered before idol
I have no label. on the other hand are a loyal member of a cult.Your rewards are campaign $ and advancement in Party Power
What's happening? A Pants off Dance off in Detroit. Dealwit.
And THAT is why soccer is the most exciting sport in the world. Most dramatic game I've ever seen
We just got a direct message asking where our walk-in store is at. We are at 4197 Memphis Ave. Cleveland Ohio 44144. Between Fulton/F.Prkway
: overheard on Congress, "I think that theater troop is re-enacting scenes from the bible?" "No dude, it's from King Kong!"
Yes, twice! First group got merged into another local group. 2nd group just launched 6 months ago & is now up to 51 members.
No days off.
Omg she said none of her projects have scopes...
“How do you say delicious in Cuban?” - Herman Cain
Master Plan Meeting Fairmount and Westside: Martin Luther King School 108 S. 9th Street, Newark, NJ May 17(Thursday), Join us
sis ill be fine i promise and can you bring me a bucket im gonna puck again
My headphones just snapped somehow
Thanks for the follow Billy! Stop in for an #adjustment and talk #food sometime!
Watching a tree hugging film with ralph Nader And my wife
I don't want a relationship where people say 'they look cute together'. I want one where they say 'look how happy they are together.
bitch u socked me :( lol
Do anybody kno a good lawyer that can help u get ur license back
“: Loved the story ...lol Loved the "robbing the craddle" line. Should the police be notified???” right?!?!
os beat yankees dude
Hey!!! My regional TESOL association is looking for keynote speakers for a November conference. Who are your favorites?
i'll try to arrange something for you and the rest of my supporters outside US, can't make any promises yet
Can't wait for tonight!!!!
wow Bob! Great article about photo micrography, thanks!
Top 6 Tips from our LegalShield lawyers: 2. There are no "dumb" questions, but many mistakes are made by not asking a question.
“: #Gemini needs substance to back up the style, or she will not be very happy in life.”swagger&appearance not enough
Check out this SlideShare Presentation on LinkedIn : Download - Valana Minerals Wholesale
No more shoppin for me, I promised myself that(:
Thanks for following looking forward to today's run!
fried rice & crab ragoons !
04/09/12: "Love yourself. Just remember that. Stop being jealous. You're not jealous. You're amazing. You're loved. You'll be loved."
Hawks, Sixers, Spurs! Pacers tomorrow :D
I thinking chewing on razorblades is starting to affect my health.
Want to help the environment and #Starofhope. Receive a free recycling pickup w/ donation of can food and/or toiletries
He who sees the truth let him proclaim it without asking who is for it or who is against it. ~Henry George
Not sure works, I retweeted a tweet that said SURE to follow back and yet to be followed. . .
did you go to the gem show? :)
Where and if you enjoy it do it!
The fact Dylan knows the words to Boyfriend >>
nice! i'm pumped to see this Joey Bosa kid on the DL for 2013.
Good morning world, time to start knocking out those lists
like seriously I just want to meet them and talk about normal things not about their pop life you know
word ok, and thanks ;) figured I'd give Bart a break lol
Yep you are so right we haven't played anyone. Or more importantly BEAT anyone!
Nice! Buddy? What color? The police found my scoot this weekend! :-D
There are models and the exact opposite and very little in between here in Cali
Oh no. What's wrong?
I guess JJ couldn't hack it in Israel and he can't in the NBA
Happy Friday = $4 glasses of wine till 4pm!
happy ending? Gotta do it right big man.
Give thanks to the Lord for HE IS GOOD, and His mercy endures FOREVER! Amen!
maybe #webOS could make its way into things like cars and kiosks. Those would fit #HP's desired consulting-based business model.
Thanks for the RTs folks. We know who you are.
YAMATO was the only one I remember vividly making it look good considering he went over the rail with him.
Oh My God. I would literally die! like Id stand up and start screaming and freaking out haha. Im literally soo sorry
I've never loved/hated anyone as much as I do
Potato bacon soup today made by Wow!
THANKS !!! - You should make one; you have the best style of anyone I know! :) RT: you're adorbs...
We met our fundraising goal - thank you! I couldn't do this without your friendship and support. Thank you again!!!
Daughter had her first seizure in almost two years, it was small and she came out of it on her own.
My segment with Steve Dolinksy ("a.k.a. The Hungry Hound") airs on ABC-7 today at 11 a.m. Find out about gems tucked into places!
Can't tell people nothing without them telling others smh. Can u keep things to yourself for once in your life, damn
thanks big homie!!
i am giving taskpaper a whirl for to-do's. i'll see how long i stick with it :)
aww!! thanks buddy!!
April fool!
A2. For anyone nowadays? North Korea! Let's see if I can land a NoKo trip in 20 years ;)
Affection deprived.
RESPECT MEH &&ND WHATS MiNE OR THAT'S YO ASS!..POiNT BLANK PERiOD...
it's worth it tho. A fine timepiece tells quite a story
Park Penthouse: My SD Home Garden cover story is making news Weds 8:15 a.m.-ish on KUSI TV
UK get that W!!!!!! LET'S MAKE THE DREAM GAME HAPPEN!!!!! #Cards #Cats FINAL 4!!! LOUISVILLE,KENTUCKY LEGGGOOOO
Why does Love Always Feel Like A BattleField</3
Reduce then produce. Save energy and money. From non profit CCSE. Http:WWW.reduceproduce.org before Oct 20.
My new school is HUGE! 1,300 high schoolers ! That's A LOT :O
Would you all be intrested in us doing an acoustic version of our song Symmetry, in the near future? Comment and tell us!
Cool! Yeah let me know when and whatsup!
Don't be too excited he's back. Soon you'll realize he's a shit person. Just wait. I know I'm waiting for it. It's coming.
Last night was amazing!!!!! Portraying the role of Effie White was extremely exciting!!! Headed to south Carolina to introduce Shena Renee!!
Point at dad's chest when it's hungry
Hey hope the new album is coming along for you guys, look forward to it!
Shane Dawson is still alive? :o
I'm hungry, someone feed me!
lol. He's the only exception. #alpha males can be single forever
Mr.Magoo made my Mother's Day official by puking on me in the car...-_-
It's in North by Northwest and Cary Grant has seen it.
Mahomies!! Help me convince my mom to let me go to the concert!! #MomLetEmilyGoSeeAustin!!! <3 please tweet me it!! Help Out!!
656 tweet for
great. Look forward to seeing. Tx
makes me so happy that twitter didnt exist in the 90`s.Made it harder for rappers to make a fool of themselves back then.
Even though I slept over 12hrs last night I'm still exhausted!
shitty I just woke up to Liverpool down 1-0 to Chelsea
#NeverShouldYouEver Eat a girl out when she on her period.
Since I was rudely awakened by that phone call,
I'm so down ;) Mamaw and papaw will b the deciding factors ;) love you!!
I'm really ashamed that this week Limp Bizkit is going to be my third most played artist. Now playing - Limp Bizkit: Nookie. :(
Relationships can get draining !
We met at D's office on Park last week, regarding the tv series, would love to talk you about broadcast schtuff I mentioned
Tom Bergeron never disappoints as best live tv host. ("Len will get his eyes checked during break").
The worst feeling is the guy you like the most likes your best friends and stops texting you to text her. <\3
Three different kinda food within 15 mins. I feel like i can eat the earth. Yummy tum yum
It's funny when your server tells they are sorry but they are very busy... Lol
behold: the genius of
I have no strong talents. I am only passionately curious.
I'm just sayin a gin and tonic sounds pretty tasty right about now!!!
Producers needs to allow and encourage the variety of roll playing whenever casting a character. Test their skills.
#BOYFRIENDreview its capturing the new bieber flavor new style the shift of voice & the chorus makes u wanna slow/fast dance<3
Um...I think we're out of Mango these days...
hey girl! Could you tweet me the pics!? Pretty please! :)
LMFAO. I just did the in the club. Not sure if anyone but me knows what that is.
I can't wait for prom! May 19th needs to hurry up.
Uh why would they start a Twitter account about what to do in life if we already know what to do
Ready for Nosotros? They'll be @ Salsa Under the Stars this Friday!
The rest of #smcatl was good. If you watch #FMC it was a lot of repetition.
The questions you ask today. Don't stop asking them after today. Ryan Vescio
hahaha im just reminding myself that he's been too good.
Whats on my mind is me worrying about them succeeding in life and being able to make it on their own...
i went to Crawford first semester now i go to Mira Mesa , But i AM GOING Back to Crawford (: wbu ?
Wow you all suck, everyone only joined because of
undercover writing. Lol :) sneak a verse in!! Always good to have quality time though.
I am exhausted!!!
I don't remember that. I wish there was a screenshot of Skinner telling everyone the school dance was canceled due to confusion
Little-known #Brewers fact: When tonight's game started, Vinnie Chulk was clean-shaven.
i don't think i could go a day without saying the word "fuck".
Where do you get your ideas from? Do you come up with all your own jokes? What do you think of Dane Cook?
someone needs to sing it to me lol
Don't be pushed by your problems. Be lead by your dreams.
We need to talk the third cover for Harmonics!
I somehow just got my hair to stay in a bun without any hair ties or bobby pins #soimpressed and
I get so excited when I get new hair products :p
2 for 1 Hash Caps today!!
Good game so far keep it going!
Question: What are you doing 7/7? Answer: HOBO PARTY!
thanks for the promo!
Proud of you.
Shill (2/2): I've known her since 1st grade. Rather talented and, I don't think she'd mind my saying, delightfully quirky.
i love u my friend grcey is the one who passed out with u backstage one night who had questions and all that make.
loved Australia!
is a loser
I have been asked to record a song for the 10th anniversary of the 9/11 tragedy. I feel very blessed and honored.
wait a second, thats why shes inviting me to her place ;) wait what? :O
The best place to store a Firehook baguette is in your stomach. We recommend you eat your baguette the day you buy it.
We used to be best friends one day, next day we forgot eachother miss my old bf
why are you getting snappy I was just saying
yayyyy! im hanging out with today!!! can my day get any better? lol
It's raining, it's pouring This old lady is running She went to the treadmill and fell on her head And still got up and looked stunning
Thanks for the heads up! RT : WWII the Second World War in Color... Now on #IPTV Iowa Public TV. Check it?
Back to work after a great NCDD Summer Session at Harvard University
Never thought the 1st outside run of the year would be in Feb! But god it felt so good. Nice weather always makes me mad I pay for a gym.
An Elephant a Day Elephant No 176 Upholstery Foam - upholstery foam
Tequila isn't fixing my cold
always ya betch!!! You scoop any frat stars at fox fields?
juss walking in the door , bouta shower & find something to do since my baby don went to sleep on me <3 Goodnight World!
just traded sheet not to long ago....go me
RT : Bjork said it best. All is full of love. You'll be taken care of.
"You're a little cunt"
Now following a builder of #sustainable cardboard computers.
I hate when im sick and my voice sounds like im in a tunnel:/
College basketball >
You all should have your stickers in the next day or two. It's not my fault! Blame the USPS!
the jacksonville jaguars drafted the best nfl rookie names: Bryan Anger and Long Ding
Tony's Coneys here I come for like a week ahahhahaha
#DWTS think you all killed it tonight! Best of luck at results show tomorrow!
bella cant you say hi to mi sister she is your biggest fan. Please.
>> gotta love spring baseball at the 'lab'.
"Follow your hopes and dreams" ......... Okay- But wait- I already follow Justin on twitter.
#DidYouReallyJust flirt with my boyfriend? -.-
miss you guys!
Congrats to #Navy on their 10th consecutive win over Army in "America's Game"!
#TellTheWhiteHouse to stop caring what Republicans think. About anything.
Hahaha! RT @ Matt_Riggs: Why do I keep #dating all these pyromaniacs? Damn you, match.com.
you should re-open #GNR season so someone can nominate a bourbon chicken place
So did you get a lottery ticket?
Will you follow me?
I wouldn't focus on what you should say to them - engage them in a conversation and you might be shocked on the insight provided
OK I admit! Still a #wildgoosechase Still don't get it! HA! What is "FOTCL!" Should I know? =D
Missing warm sunny days in Seattle should not happen. Please remove all Twitter & Facebook post about the weather in Seattle
Check out my new post on www.shoppersmap.com An antique & retro blog.
thx! been meaning to ask: she wears this panda kigurumi at breakfast, but it's not sexual at all. we're not furries right?
Solutions? "Move your kids to the county... really, who wants to stay in Baltimore their whole life?" "Why should you have to move out?!"
yummy vegan Panini @ #BiteNYC , off-Broadway show #4thStreetTheatre, dessert #LulasSweetApothecary fun evening w/ Karen, Tony, Don, & Dave
WOW!!! its hotter than my a$$ in a mini skirt out here,,....
~The Entire C'SM Houston office!
Wake n Brew!!! (Wake up and Make Coffee) LMFAO
thank you!
Learned a new word today: idempotent. Describes a method that causes no change (like multiply by 1). Reminds me of definition of insanity...
C Benson or L Blount in at flex?
Thank You Thank You...
ridiculous bounce pass by Ty
Love that the lawyer is advising Maloof not to answer questions. It's like he's on trial.
If we encounter dark moments in this journey, then so be it. I think the real gift is really knowing.
Go listen to DIEBOMB! Get ready for the new stuff soon!
now updating Twitter through Google Buzz. now if only I can get it to update Facebook...
my friend barry would be very disappointed in me right now. he puts a lot of effort in his mac and cheese. and its delicious. it really is!
Unless your values cannot travel faster than the speed of light in a vacuum, do not tell me you believe in moral relativity, kids.
Congratulations on your anniversary! That might have been around when I met you, eh? (the Canadian ending intentional)
1000's of vacant homes across America in need of repairs equal jobs now America!!!!! No one is talking about this but me.
Ohh, so tired.
Great Organization to consider supporting.
Seems #xboxlive is down. Now must endure the ire of my kids who can't access streaming. Just peachy.
Adding the "ancient "
Nice, I love it when recommendation algorithms are spot on. Netflix recently recommended "Titanic 2" to me based on my history.
LOL it wasn't me it was you!
#WavingMyHand You will see this Tweet, even though I don't have internet, and you will call me tonight.
Praying that Miami loses
Good morning #TomorrowBook followers! Thank you guys for helping to developed our amazing search engine! Remember to add logos today!
If people can't see how Bmore biz prospers from #Ravens success they must have their head in the sand. O's could do it if they cared!
iconiacs for life ^.^
Pretty sure I just saw ! :)
wow Mt Baker has gotten 104" of snow in the past 6 days. That's insane!
I just cleaned my Twitter...lost over 200 followers..less I didn't lose them..I deleted them..bad, bad followers
GET REAL! True Success has a HIGH PRICE that most are not willing to PAY...yet they are disappointed by what they got for what they spent!
Having a party for the #holidays ? Still looking for a caterer? LiLLiES provides excellent full svc offsite #catering ! Msg us for details!
Listening to Rainbows! Most underrated dude in the game.
Headband on deck. get at me
haha that's not a lame excuse. I had to get my haircut though at 7. So I couldn't make it if I wanted to.
#azabbgic2012 - 1st time in 12 years im not there- instead at #mainevent w/ w/ another former int'l N'siah, Marcy Rosenbaum!
HA! Sadly, I had the same fear!
she annoys the living #SHIT outta me.
Just finished up in the studio about to go to sleep for a couple hrs!!! I'm tired y'all!
i just want it to be summer already
I agree with Rashard Mendenhall...he's spot on about 9 11...I dunno about all that "God" stuff though. LOL
blessed and thankful
Out of Freeroll with Top pair/flush draw vs top set...oh well...still got the $5k to take down!
Oh no! Which ones were put to rest? I think we can help on the new pair too! :-)
Dude I'm sunlight wasted.
The entire Royals roster will be on the disabled list by July.
hilarious when Jacob couldnt find a bright spot. The draft was another reason that org frustrates the heck out of u
You are the weakest link, goodbye
Haha, phew!! And absolutely! I has so much fun, and it was great to meet you!!
what do you indorse now big brother?
#FF Massachusetts Libraries:
kk love you very much and i did have to say sorry :D and bye :<3
Lol. She will be back tomorrowww!!! At least i think..
Tune to WSFA-TV Ch.12 @ 5 p.m. for comments on AL's ranking in 2011 KIDS COUNT DATA BOOK, Thanks Bryan Henry!
Just experienced my first iAd on an iPad app. Should probably get used to seeing those.
I was born without ANY limiting beliefs. Today, I let go of any judgments, opinions or misperceptions I have about my acting career.
i am so up right now
On some shit I def shouldn't be doing #ohwell the person I need most is dying the second most important person isn't here
rock for love 3 in memphis this weekend. special guests to boot!
RT : Having a conversation about trust// Had that earlier fam 2day, :-/ lol
same, but I actually have to agree with her at some point. so moms are def ALWAYS right lol
Girls' Night Out!
Tyler's little speech about find me SOBS
The rabbi's sermon was basically an excuse for shtick.
Will we see you at tonight for Kansas City Moving Images - a selection of short films by local and regional film makers?
Shoutout on her bday hope you enjoy it :)
Appearance of the
Part of what makes him great though.
Great brands make a contribution to culture. Lesser brands make a contribution to disease (cancer, obesity, heart attack)
#AskAlexConstancio favourite meal of the day?
Hi! Can we do 7:15? Leaving downtown now. Hope you get this in time, and I'll see you soon!!
It's Friday...
. Yep. The author and I used to work in radio together in the early 90's. He has a YA called PANDEMIA.
oh theyd love that, theyd have a ball! Lol
Thank you much for the RT of None of This (the abridged title :)). Hope it's been a good day for you!
Coming to TLA? Tenn-Share Electronic Resources program, 3:30 on Thursday. TEL news! new free language learning database! new discounts!
Project X is one of the best movies I have ever seen!
No doubt. Fetching, I believe the word would be. Enjoy your evening, my friend.
I can feel my brain doing something here ....
That is awesome. I didn't even used to LIKE ! ;)
Tyrn New Things <3 I learn make for better ways !
So do I. How is that possible?
But a useful fiction, like 'Communists in Congress' or 'voter fraud' RT A "welfare queen" is not an actual thing that exists.
Thanks everyone who voted! Results in October 5!
heck yeah! You should sneak down with him for a few days
Great time speaking to the women of Ginger Creek Community Church this a.m. Still pondering a couple questions they asked....
You get em framed? How much cost? We might be able to hook you up.
I spend a lot of time thinking about where I want to _visit_ next. (and not on pinterest) does that count?
lmaoo! her concert was amazing!! I would totally go & see it again!
Havin been on twitter for a min. Its holloween.:D
Thanks for the info!
Congrats! Been sick all week but if I'm up for it I'll be there too :)
Quit Facebook again. This time for good, I hope. Mental age of many of my friends on it--and honestly, myself--is about seven.
my tits
Tronny is on the move. News at 11.
Than you so much we REALLY appreciate it!
see!..great minds.
#current McCain's wife just looks pretty. Michelle is pumping hands and gathering feedback! What can't the "others" see?
RT If you get a product for free, you are not the customer. You are the product.--
That shits awesome
when ever you ready
Winter #golfing! Where do you usually play?
I've always believed that if you put in the work, the results will come
Ashton Kutcher was at the Kentucky Derby....
Taylor gave selena n Justin a hug
my cousin lost 9 pounds from being sick for 4 days.
Not thrilled to see calling this as a "must-read." Does that imply an endorsement? (2/3)
roasting transforms the product into the finished product. If one tried selling green coffee beans as "local" I'd say no
Excuse my charisma
Is it more helpful for museums to get feedback from visiting students or their teachers?
how you gonna do a brotha like that you don't see this new knee?!
(c) itself was kind of.... bleh
Hey collegiettes™! Don't forget to vote for HC's #homecoming nominees & and our campus cutie Roman Nelson!
bummer ... no peanut butter cookies at my local Mrs. Fields :(
RT : The #roofstatus for today's #Brewers game is: OPEN" Is this the first of the year? Hope this helps them get a W!
How do you like your men??!!
That's dope. What type of business' u trying to start?
I just can't do it I get destracted to easily
Got some news for you steeler news for you guys and girls
#It'sFriday Tel ya coworkers off
“: Alright guys… Hambino sandwich or hot dog at the game tonite?!” ...Garlic Fries!!!!
Like momma Cheryl said, I'm the only one left to go on a mission trip.
Getting ready to be 3 different people at once on a tweet chat. Here we go.
CONGRATS TO JEANETTE IERVOLINO!!!! YOU ARE THE SEASON PASS WINNER FOR OUR TEXT LIST RAFFLE!!! HOPE TO SEE YOU OFTEN!!
What do you think about today's game?
#NationalFibromyalgiaDay My passion in life is sports & politics. I no longer can sit through a sporting event. The chronic pain? Disabling.
haha, that's what abhi, niyati, and I are doing too haha. those old guys killed it
Amazon is so overpriced. What happen to that being the site to go for a deal??
Tornados near Papa Johns tonight but no touchdowns reported, so nothing unusual for Louisville Cardinal football fans
A man loses contact with reality if he is not surrounded by his books. - F. Mitterand
Excellence can be attained if you care more than others think is wise, risk more than others think is safe, dream more than others think...
I bet could learn a thing or two from you! Thanks for joining Twitter Thrissy. Words to live by!
Getting ready to play for the CD release party for Maurice Mohan at 650 N Dearborn in Chicago
Business After Hours tonight at AmericInn Hotel & Suites - 9780 North by Northeast Blvd. - Fishers
Getting to do something very cool tonight! Will post a pic later!!!! (: so excited!
Founder versus owner mindset in a startup: which r you?
#mudmelt Ann Pendelton:how to work both of the split narratives of higher Ed-"elite humanist" & workforce prep.
Do they still make Gallo wine? Haven't seen that it years!
#ThingsIHateAboutFacebook men writing inappropriate/uninvited "come on" things on your PHOTOS..it's an album, it'll be there forever!
Love LA, hate the traffic AND the douchebag on the bike who keeps making the lights before me.
If any of you have good art fair build-out images for upcoming weekend - send 'em my way please...
Thank you Whataburger for making my night now Pandora till I crash
Finally got my hair done :]
Great website. Sorry for the unfollow but bouncing on twitter limits, Keep up the good work Seth
Hello. What do you mean by "knock it off?" Are you upset? Tony at tony calvano dawt cawm.
Oz Patisserie Mobile Dessert Truck will be at Explora today.
Jury to hear closing arguments now in case against former SDPD traffic cop accused of assaulting females
it's nice to see the stars. don't get it in the city.
That's clear enough. you can get anywhere from Earl's Court, right?
sorry you're dealing with all this drama Bro. Corley.
Thunder and rain, it has arrived. Thank you Jess and everyone who was present tonight. I hope y'all come back to see us again.
Hahaha anyone else watching this Bulls v. Heat game?! Awesome
God loves us too much to allow us to stay tied to anyone or anything that does not bring out the best in us.
Knock It Out
like i said, I don't need to battle her. My spot is solidified! Its just crazy she battling chicks with 0% chance.
Love this! RT : "Courage is nothing more than taking one step more than you think you can." -Holly Lisle
I go in on every track & flow 100% ... I hate when people say" for a chick she ridin out " No as a artist im rippin shit period point blank
Teasing Georgia. Shall I write a song about that gorgeous flower?
cool then
Done for the week
in NYC now! Going to va for a few days again tomorrow cause I have a class on Wednesday!
DID YOU RECEIVE MY EMAIL??
Yum! Enjoying with the Bhavans!
Hoop session 24 hour fitness Manteca ca come thru
Spread The Love! <3
RT : Join us for an Artist Meet & Greet with our new director, Elizabeth Dunbar. Tonight! 6-8pm. Free Refreshments!
Looking forward to hosting a UWEBC retreat on 3/24 focusing on promotional strategies, paid search, and mobile commerce.
Spread the word - #HyattABQ isn't a 4 diamond hotel anymore! BC we have horrid service and a run down hotel
Happiness will NEVER come to those who do not appreciate what they already have.
Like May 11th. You got any better?
YOU ALL SHOULD COME OVER AND WE'LL WATCH IT THEN K
how do trannys figure into the whole marriage issue?
It's all about the squats
Good night :)
pan de sal!!
Which horror film did you see that day instead?
We found some eggs in the outdoor garden.
Anyone using Google+??
I love you guys more than I love food.... And that's just crazy. Xo
and that old nigga snoring
thanks bro
I just wanna take it nice n slow
Why am I awake?? Lol
Are you in the Portland Bike Club? Follow for info on the latest perks and discounts.
As long as I can write in a presidential candidate, the primary resultz do not matter for I will write in Ron Paul name !!
Studying my lines for an Alice in Wonderland show tomorrow. Fun!
RT : World #Malaria Day is just around the corner. In the fight to prevent malaria in #pregnancy, what accomplishments have been...
Yeah I drink so what. Nobody can tell me not to I'm legal.
Tonight's skills development with DNP (Damn Near Perferct)!
On our way to Big Bear! Yay! So excited!
spout partisan political pablum 4 their uber wealthy masters. Taxes rose when nec. even during the Reagan admin
Having a better night. Wrapping Christmas presents with my sister while listening to my nephew Gabriel(6 months) giggling. I love it :]
LIEUTENANT "CRIES LIKE AN INFANT WHEN HIS BF TEXTS HIM REALLY SWEET THINGS", REPORTING FOR DUTY [does 10000 pushups]
Definitely. Dont even get me started on the Red Sox right now haha
The more I change direction, the wilder the road becomes. ~Chao Yi
can you post the studio version on your youtube asap? :))))))
Yep RT : Enjoy watching fans over-analyse close losses... It's baseball... things happen!
I'll stick to the original.
Check out Week 7 of the w/ Tonight at 7:40 W/ on
and The Dowager Countess is appalled that she missed out on an evening of debauchery.
c'mon this is the only way u can show and see real #Talents!!
u got a single u pushing?
How did I never watch RESCUE ME when it was on tv? It's amazing and right up my alley!! Currently busting through season 4!
It felt good to have a week off and away from technology. But, I'm back and in full swing.
Im bout to turn up shit bout to get #Rachet in dis bitch lol
Headed to the gym then the studio!!!!
#BackInElementarySchool everybody was friends, there was no drama, & no reputation.
The timing and structure...
baby boo
About to check out a presentation at VMWare: Adobe Flex and Cloud Computing.
Hang on #Bucks!!!
RT Well that's annoying. Certain Kindle Books only work on Kindle Fire or Kindle for Android. Why not Kindle for iOS?!
I need yo number! So I can hit ya up! Haha
My twin needs to save me -_-
Thanks bringing yummyness to 's exclusive media reception! Thanks again
lol dnt hate on my family boo!!
Rediscovering the Sames' You Are The Sames.
argh - flight has mechanical problems. Will miss my connection in DTW
S/o out to the New Followers. Much Love to yall! , , and
why do i keep running from the truth, all i ever think about is...
RT : “Nothing in this world is harder than speaking the truth, nothing easier than flattery.”-Fyodor Dostoyevsky
and you know the Baltimore-Washington area will eat it up
That was then, and this is now.
Reasons why I don't like living with my mother: 3. I have to explain where I'm going and with who... Like does it really matter???
I want to notice me if won't... *sighs* never giving up :)
Thanks for the shout out! We love seeing posts like this.
Glad you found that link useful!
I shouldn't be near Vegas and have money in my pocket. -Adam Sandler
Had an awesome time speaking to the women of Azusa World Ministries.
RT : We have installed thousands of #doors in #Denver alone. Don't trust your #security to anyone else!...
how long of a leash does aramis have... im ready to pull the plug on him already. he just aint seeing the ball. sit him.
lbi for the week...
exactly! Lol I did the same thing except I've been laying down since 9:30ish lol imma be hella tired at school tomorrow! DX
Thank you for all your work!!!
We're supposed to have a tsunami drill this AM and in typical island fashion, it's way behind schedule.
baby you light my world like no body else<3
well i got company on the way gnite twitter. be on da look out 4 my first video, aintisentimental its very organized,S/O one nine, great job
Actors! The new acting blog post is up - "Making the Choice."
This is one of those mornings where I'll be picking the marshmallows out of the Lucky Charms and throwing the rest away.
Great win. Now hitting Stacey's in stallis.
www.lynda.com. 25 bucks for a month's subscription.
I had 6 thats right, SIX snack packs in TWO days. Whats the most of a strangest thing you've ever eaten??
No lucky catches on the helmut this year.....
>Thank You, We Should Get You a Photoshoot Together, What Area Are You Located
If this day keeps trying to test me, I'm going to turn into a Real Housewife and rip out it's weave.
What a night this has turned into!?
WM: Can we turn the term on its head & use it to define musics that have become global in their reach/performance/localism?
:) Thank you!
ah :) would be cool... had a lot of random interest in the trip... tho if they buy i wouldn't be able capitalize on it now
I Love LA
Dissertation director acquired. Now for a couple readers and a title...
Aluminum beer bottle are prob the best invention. #cans>bottles
would frontline fundraisers even want u to set up a socmedia dashboard for them?
#fridaylistens Finished Affair by Child read by Dick Hill - excellent narrator. Started Capitol Game by Haig read by Scott Brick - my fave!
Nfl draft - around corner
"I was born when you kissed me. I lived while you loved me. I died when you left me."
gyros from the Parthenon downtown
It's all about the #Bruins and #Celtics baby!
I got my ass kicked by my friend ripley whil playing mortal kombat vs dc universe.
Guess what movie I watched last night???
Can you please tweet our event at on May 8th we'll be performing! Come check us out!
I guess I'll take your word for it. I have had my iPhone since December and have little issues with it, except for battery.
i know! Lol
I haven't paid to submit to show my work in years. Can't stand that model.
Do not argue with an idiot. He will drag you down to his level and beat you with experience.
we were always the last stop, and it was crazy. I just left the tap open & kept putting glasses under
That's just depressing.
We are looking forward to it! :)
hahahah why are you not sharing the treadmill?! lol
Goodnight world
Soups of the day: Chicken Pastina, Greek lemon Chicken, tortellini brodo, Beef Barley, ravioli Florentine, Lentil!
S/O to for chatting with if you missed that interview go to www.blogtalkradio.com/lawlessra
Im going to fucking Hawaii..scratch that I meant Florida!..scratch that I mean the Dells
no. so i guess i'm still in book 1 then. thank you!
that would be great! We should have a link by tomorrow.
#Marry the person who knocks u off ur balance & laughs w/u while u gain composure, stronger. Then walks straight ahead with you.
bwhahaha “: RT Marriage = Betting someone half your shit that you'll love them forever.”
: how are you? I hope to catch up soon. Your beautiful ice is featured in our video of the ITLM cocktail ...
Mind if I steal your icon lol?(:
Hilarious real-life diversion! Just what I needed to read!
Oh, crap. Now I can't get "I wanna dance with somebody" out of my head. Flashing back to the 80s!
Beer Garden Sponsors: , Blue Mountain Brewery, South Street Brewery,
Love it when you're on the show!!
i'm pretty sure you are right about that!
Great! So they Tweet independently, but do they all contribute as admins in the museum Facebook page?
If you asked me how I'm doin I would say I'm doin just fine, I would lie and say that you're not on my mind.💙🎶
yep here in 33 mins!!! :D
twitter on phone > twitter on computer
Yep. Needs 2 be door to ur house..come on in RT : A4: "Fans aren't valuable if they only engage w/you one time"
love it when people text you "hey" and then never answer back...
I remember begging my neighbor to drive me to pick it up on cassette! "The Downward Spiral" was released today in 1994. VIA
You guys look great! Happy Purim to you and the family.
Hi Tommy, if you want to support Charity Water this holiday season, you can! With the pungle.me app. Check it out.
A man shall NEVER use emoticons when texting with another man.
in silent lunch.
keep it n check this week Last time we played IU u got a lil rambunctious. Let's do the talkin after we take care of business
#GreaterThanMoment Nice score! You're married now!
even better! was too windy last time lol
Please consider attending the first Associate Member Ceremony on campus in the Butler Pavilion Boardroom on Sat 2/18 at 4pm
Quote of the Day - Dude. #forrealz. I hate everything. So does Alexis.
Oh that's a tough call! Let me know if you want any quotes. I'm happy to help!
Follow Mr. King here
you know it.
the seagulls in Seattle just received warning
Lightning and thunder outside and the first fireflies of summer.
You guys are all awesome! :D
Psst! We're closing. Our founder opened #socialmedia shop & creative team is now Follow us there!
#ff interesting, fun & engaging
YES!!! I could use a few massages at CSA! Less than 4 weeks and I'll get one!
~~Thanks for the follow!
Stop the Ban has a press conference on Tuesday March 8th! Any media-istas out there want more info?
Cubs still in last place, proof again world wont end, info you may or may not like :)
First look at the today since they'll be televised in Texas... Going to be a great day today!
You wear white. And I'll ware out the words "I love you & you're beautiful." .
Did I miss it? I never watch, but this I have to see.
I was just tweeting with about that on side. I actually CALLED him on phone today. How old-fashioned!
u tell them lola, dont have that shit!
Mention u saw us on twitter for a free hello kitty goodie bag with free gifts!! :)
#MBAVseason2 let's trend it my babysitters a vampire lovers!!!!
I spilled red paint on the carpet :'(
awe! wally is cleaning the fuck outta rebel. and rebel keeps trying to run away from him.
Remembering Mahatma Gandhi - 61st years ago today was assassinated
It's hard not to cry... 
Very cute owl I must say...wild eyes! Seems she's made a nest on our front porch...
I know one day you'll notice & follow me but I guess tonight isn't my night... Anyways goodnight Madison :) <3
Madonna is a American Icon..Have never been the biggest fan,thou she deserves a Hell of alot more respect than what she received.Well done!
“: GUESS WHAT!!!! #PregnancyProject airs this Friday on #Lifetime. Are you going to watch it?! I AM I AM!!”
A typical Michelle Obama outfit is more than my mortgage payment...By a factor of three!
Nicely done, I really set that one up for you, hopefully I get the assist.
what's wrong baby girl?
Check out #Mullen Boston for PR internships (that can lead to a job).
so what's ur predictions on the matches tonight for
my time was 29 i think idk
hm.. Now you tell me.
You're most welcome! >> : Thank you :)
Narv-Dog and Gamel done for the year, now Gomez on the DL, the crew can't catch a break
thank you
Never feel sorry for yourself
#ImSickOf always being picked up late. & its like she does it every single freaking day.
“: "America's Most Hated Family" - everyone needs to watch it on NatGeo right now” kardashians?
Looking for solid enterprise mobile development 'best practices' info. Hit me...
why have police blocked all of dekalb avenue?
you just made my night ♥
When you come to the end of your rope, tie a knot and hang on.
drop some food off at a homeless shelter.
Thought the same thing when I heard it, but its true. They have a fancy 6pack sampler box and everything.
ROCKING THE MIC & GETTING STUPID! This Wed! Apr11 w/ & Say #BrownRiceComedy & UR in FREE!
Ha. I remember that game, but never really got into it (seemed terribly boring). Island looks lovely, though!
Thanks for yesterday's retweets! Great conversation -
you have the spartan hookup
No he left this morning
People that write checks......nevermind, they wont see this anyway
Can I just fall asleep listening to your #heartbeat <3
Talked to a few #smwwdc attendees this week and your metrics discussion received a lot of praise.
Thanks for the feedback! Glad you had a great time.
How does ereader type (kindle vs ipad) affect our understanding of old texts?
Stuck in traffic and I really have to pee.
This just in: A NEW RECORD! More than 750 in attendance at MarkLogic World!
good question, especially considering TSN's lovefest with the world jrs
starts this week......
Like different personalities?
if ur an artist who send ThaCW stuff but dnt support other artist by listens DL or w/e how/why do u expect for others 2 do the same 4 u!!!
I had not considered those, but yeah, that could get ugly real quick.
That's one of my most favorite songs ever!
I want to RT you on my Twitter stream & FB Page. Post your inspiring tweet to (no links pls)
I know bro..
Israel sends an average of over 200 full trucks a day of food, medicine, clothes and other goods to the West Bank every day
coffee and food are great but I wish I had a cab to get home
see how tired Omer is, this is why I wanted Noah to get a few minutes. but if he can't go, he can't go
Broke people make me sick.
I have neighbors like that right now, just throw in a huge barking dog in the backyard they neglect.
If you have some time on hand check out some new music. goo.gl/cP4DW
Wine and Canvas LA tonight at Jerry's Deli in Westwood village! Love this creative, joy spreading job!!!
Arizona adds another weapon that Kolb won't be able to get the ball to.
in bologna - where should get some good bolognese?
Still looking out for Owner/Operators to run under our Quick Fleet authority...
should eat NY Style Pizza more often because that was without a doubt her best performance ever tonight:)
European circus in town - Inside Tucson Business European circus in town Inside Tucson Business by Herb Stratford UApresents hosts Zoppe
has a worse relationship with the truth than I do.
Says the guy that told me to
was his title an oxymoron ?
wow so kind of you!! Thank you very much.
Yes.. Haha ! But your cover of #1 girl was awesome !!
Doors just opened for tonights performance of !! mention us in a tweet in your here for the shows tonight!!
The black angus filet mignon looks delicious! We can't wait to try it :)
In the last two months, Ryan Adams, , , The Black Keys and then in April. Life is good.
Hopespin hopes you guys have a great Friday! Stay safe :)
need a man. now.
I'd like the record to show I've been a fan, since before it was cool... #HockeyHipster :)
I need a ME day nails, eyebrows, facial a little shopping and a massage (:
There's just something about Snoop Dogg's face that makes me super uncomfortable.
Seeing people all over my Facebook graduating and getting out of school, and I'm still getting homework daily.
I swear it don't seem like we have school tomorrow.
Follow Friday... please ask your followers to follow us and support "Banner Day" www.worldchampionfans.com
Ready for summer.
who did she follow?  Lucky
I truly appreciate you. Go make it happen today! Tweet cha lata!
beautiful video... great use of social trends to build awareness
Two shoots in opposite corners of state. Will spend hours on road. But the story is great, the roads clear and Ron has good tunes on iPod.
smells like bacon
At the ASALH annual meeting in Richmond VA! Session about Frederick Douglass
Foxes. Heat-seeking missiles. Baracudas.
-- woman's desire / deeply rooted / the wild violets #haiku ~Chiyo-ni
what neighborhood?
RT : Just got off the phone with and (aka my mini me) and I <3 them all
What a crazy Mongo New Year! Thanks to everyone who came out to Beach Club
Just saw the moon, Jupiter, and Venus, all in a row. My day is now complete.
I hear you will be in Seattle this week...Will you be here for long? Will you have time to meet for Lunch/Coffee?
We're on the way! Looking forward to 's Harry Balzer and 's keynotes!
RT : Make this day joyful by filling it with joy. The more you choose to experience it, the more joy there will be.
This shit is getting old...
Chris Paul and Blake Griffin both started tonight for the Clippers. Game is underway.
Need another song! Barbie Girl's almost done!
Check out my tweets from today i have my life planned out!
“: True fact me and nick were the same height in the summer and now when we stand next to each other he towers over me ):”
FYI - don't follow links in any DM's that say "lol, is this you" or "this is really funny"
my sister is weird
HireUp - interview selection turned into a game
Mikey was just on my tv omg ilysm fangirlingggg
since I can't go can we meet up somewhere?
My mom just texted me to ask if I could rig the giveaway so her friend would win. WTF?
You Still Have All Of My Heart. <3
Edvard Munch's famous painting The Scream is NOT up for auction. It is another version of it he drew with pastels that may go for $200 mil.
Thanks for the follow and mention !
that's for sure; haven't been too involved in MD's conservation efforts. i know MICA (my school) has a good recycling prog
My friend, , should have her own show on the Food Network! yummy and beautiful supper last night!
The word BURGLED amuses me
"Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted."-Matthew 5:4
Being weird is more fun when you are surrounded by other weird people. In this, I am blessed.
no we'll go at 4 x
I think its time to change my background
Feel like I'm having a middle-aged crisis watching all this Sex in the City
Which ones are you bidding on?
"Why are you crying?" " I listened to Free Bird by accident."
welcome to Twitter
And now I'm done whining about church. Soon there will be basketball to critique. And my hoards of followers can't wait.
interesting, I seemed to have recovered nicely from not really doing shit. #feelgood, tho I'll prob die this weekend
Twitter TBH. Message me.
cool. Thanks. Was wondering because I had seen something about tickets.
thnx RT : great updates and healthcare msg call tonight.Thanks and David Simas.
What color was your day? Mine was white. (Interesting party question tonight)
Ready for rock to put boot to asses
oxymorons are like that. However I did have a pair of UA fleece pants, black with a tux like stripe. Hm
I'm so punk even when I have sex it's DIY.
omfg, that was soo fucking nasty. some people have absolutely NO SHAME !
why are u sorry?????
Heading over to to check out the restaurant scene & happy hours - , , & Flemings
Our latest venture is set to launch in days. We have been working to perfect it and also figure out a way for you to get paid.
Ready to watch you play some football!!
The very definition of settling down. Ace-quality recovery.
thx for your support and RT :)
I Love March Madness <3
Woman! Some of us hv to work tomorrow.
Went 2 a family wedding today, someone had an idea "lets put goldfish in the water of all the centerpieces" Bad idea!Dead goldfish everywhre
#sxswmygrocerystore Gentlemen: the verdict is in. If you fashion yourself in the hipster set, laminate wooden canes seen nearly every aisle.
Looks like it's pizza for lunch today! Thanks guys!
Happy birthday to ! It's your day bro
RAPE NO LUBE RT SNEAKERHEAD FACT: NIKE paid Carolyn Davidson $35 to design the NIKE SWOOSH logo in 1971.
Nothing much in Language class . Hbu Alex ?
for me?
Hey Terri, how are you?
THE CORNER??!!
Life is so constructed that an event does not, cannot, will not, match the expectation
Cleaning and doing laundry,then grocery shopping later,then hitting the gym with bestie..
Nice! Congrats & I look forward to seeing more from with your Superhero PR powers!
breaking out of the new Long Island office for some RnR.
Thanks for the haircut stunting' lyk mah daddy. ;)
#mudmelt B. Berrie, chemist for nat'l gallery of art publishes with both chemists & artists.
Thanks for following!
looks cool but a bit pricey
Is that for real? Or a one off?
i don't think so...
algorithm #fail: news feed recognizes posts about Chinese New Year in English only. Plus no recognition of Lunar New Year.
True, that would be cheatN : Yeah but it's not like boosters are giving UK players prepaid debit cards or anything.
Substance Abuse Conference features recovery: A proactive approach to drug ... - Eastern Arizona Courier
2012 Seattle Wine Awards Results to be announced June 1!
Procrastination at its finest.
also, Y U NO USE LaTeX
Am I dreaning?
Love the iPhone app. Works as it's supposed to and so convenient. Earns my loyalty.
Woke up and still can't fully process what I saw on #NCISLA last night. It may take all summer. Ugh.
Only thing special about this exam is that I do great and it helps colleges look at me
I'm done on here
I want to thank you for the ARC my students will love it! I can't wait to read it!
i just can't sleep tonight, knowing things ain't right...♥
That was definitely weird. Earthquake in Washington DC!
#imagine Austin:ive commited a crime,I stole *yournames* heart,How am i supposed to tell mom this?♥ -anna
Happy Hour til 7pm! $3 rail drinks, house wine, select drafts! Come visit Jeff on the bar!
Going to the movies with my Husband to see Babies! Woo-hoo!
All of Herschel Walkers family stickers prevent him from seeing through the back window of his car.
Great to have you back in the US. How are you liking ? Have considered using it.
If a person owns a piece of land do they own it all the way down to the core of the earth?
Where words fail. Music speaks
#ArizonaWildcats Feared u were Alien Abducted passing thru Roswell, NM in route . Glad you're a Wildcat again
why?? Was it because of rain?? :o
Choking up a lung laughing seeing Laugh At My Pain for very 1st time w/ on ...
Its official: nobody likes you b/c you call people "cats" : It's official: Arian Foster is the most interesting cat I talk to
all of the girls at the ONE Hooters are sexier than any Hooters employee in the entire U.S.
Join Ohioana's own David Weaver in this event celebrating the life of Ohio State University alumna and legendary soprano of the 1930s,...
Every goal has a process. The process is as important as the goal... so any goal without a process is just a dream. What's your process?
You'd have to think they'd grab MKG. He stands to fit with anyone given his complete skill set.
I should work on being petty, I am the Durham Bulls compared to others who play it like the Yankees.
Thirsty Perch
Drew Barrymore is reportedly set to wed boyfriend Will Kopelman. The two have been romantically linked since early last year
Shout out to MMG
Lets the excuses begin..
On Lilac Festival duty today! It's a beautiful day :)
RT: bullying needs to stop kids r dieing all around the world bc of bullying!! Don't just stand their DO SOMETHING!!
#oomf is really feeling themselves' a little too much, but hey someone's gotta do it.
A kid is drawing "spider pig" from the Simpsons on the chalkboard in the middle of this lecture...and he shows no signs of slowing down
crap. Good married man response.
The kids I am babysitting are so funny lol
i will do the NEXT fan requested track at 75 LIKES!!!!! SO KEEP THEM COMING!!!!!
RUSTYS OLD 50 is up and running this Monday evening.
wait really i thought the outside was just like skin and stuff ??
Wow, great review! Congrats!
Put the brand first. It's been around 150 years. What can we do to ensure it's around for 150 more? Burberry
#schoolmemories saying the pledge of allegiance over the intercom in first grade (:
Cocaine crazy like my daddy!!!!
Happy Birthday
They were good! Great to see you. Thanks for sharing your concerns.
Going deep throat into Evangelical Republican territory (Wheaton IL)...
Cabbies have their own views on politics, religion, and sports, the three most dangerous intersections in the city.
Sometimes you say, "Oh, I didn't get much accomplished today." I'm out to one-up that. I'm going to less than has ever been done before.
Huh! I don't watch TV Sunday mornings. Will have to seek it out,
Bug bites may be to blame for a flight quarantine in Chicago that last for 3 hours yesterday - yikes!
1,005th tweet s/o goes to !
Coming Monday, we're starting a series on succession planning at businesses. Check it out in the Learning Center.
heyy twitter i am back i whent to go eat dinner and see a movie with my vos and bro i got bakc 2 hours ago and i just got out the shower!!
Bout this time last year I was trying to buy a minicoop from a friend. LOL
Thank you #ShineYourDivine with us!
hey! Replace my name right there.
#mudmelt Berrie: take delight in your work and investigations. Be curious....
damn son, you need more agee around. get you out of this camus shit.
Middle finger in the air cause I don't really care.
Rick Santorum loves government programs. Is that the new definition of conservatism?
Don't sweat the small stuff, life is hard enough. I thank the lord above, we got a great big love.
I just know that is gonna rock the role of Effie Trinket...like totally.
headed to the ice rink for a lesson with my freestyle coach.
BIO Thanks Senators Lugar, Conrad for Supporting Farm Energy
Thanks for connecting. You are in my home town of Columbus, Ohio.
Private Event Toy Rep At Your Service! Send me a DM for booking :)
Tell me about what you're doing and I'll retweet it! Are you in a play? Do you have a short film? A trailer for your next movie? Share!!
Weed Leaf THC - Bright Hippie style Cannabis leaf THC t-shirt design
maybe Iris tweeted for me
Are You Against Bulling? :)
what is it?
In life there are winners, losers, and those who learn from being both.
I'm trying to think of a new product or service to offer for a class. What are some societal problems that you feel need to be solved?
Thank u :)
Hello Mac, Thank you
Could we repurpose your Facebook post about the webslam as a gb.tc blog post?
when u head up aint no sucker punch real tawk we boxing thats it.....
my pleasure. thx 4 inspiring me!
thanks for the retweet!
can't wait to pretend its summer! “: you know it! #Jam ?”
lol gey RT : Just played a couple songs from my new album and he loves them #YES Feel so proud and happy #I♡Music ☺♡♫
whats good bro?
Hey, How Do I Go About Sending You Guys Music?
Crazy Democrat turn crazy Republican Prince Brown files to run in HD 14, in Jacksonville, when he lives in Orlando.
maybe a whistle and flash light then
on my way
If anyone is trying to get into the Fashion Attic right now, I apologize-Meghan has been in traffic for an hour and should be there shortly!
A quarter of America doesn't believe that we went to the moon.
love u too and I am proud to be your big cuzzo
Clinking a glass to more fabulous follows! :)
Hey, I Just met you! And this is crazy! But here's My number.... so call me Maybe! ;)
So close, yet a million miles away.
Monday is the first of the week,/and I think of you all week./I beg Monday not to come/so that I will not think of you/all week.DianeWakoski
Flavor of the week Mediterranean. A little sweet and a little salty vanilla with a swirl of chocolate.
GOOD MOANIN' EVERYONE
I heard you handeled all of the flashing camera's and fans very well. Sometimes you are too kind. Relax today!
At Adega wine cellar relaxing.
Hotel to hotel, girl I could use your company... Full name & birthdate, I book a flight and u come to me
boomerang back
RT : I love that fact that said she would start tweeting more n she's staying committed to her words!#dedicated <3 it
and by books for school I mean my own copies that I purchased!
bc ur a weekend club warrior
Pork & Pineapple sausage only $4 bones!!
pretty damn jealous, have fun! Any good shows lined up?
Three Apparel is at the Abbot Kinney Festival TODAY Sunday, Sept. 27, 10:00 AM to 6:00 PM. Check out our new baby line!
Its so boring without a game system
thanks Katie!
Ouch, I'm assuming that's not repairable. Any chance your car insurance policy covers bike accidents?
“: Imagine a world where we could 'Like' 'Likes.'” Dare to dream. Dance like nobody's watching.
The #UHsb team has taken a 5-1 lead over #SJSU #WAC tournament currently in the top of the 6th inning
on a scale of 1-10 this episode of #Revenge will definitely be an infinity :)!!
So Happy you are back out doing your thing :)
Or heard the "so glad I can use the computer here since I can't afford one" stories.
Aww. Thanks, gorgeous! You're pretty awesome yourself! <3
Okay my goal this week is to find Justin!
Btw, my Aunt Vivian is so much like Lemon that I experience PTSD watching this show sometimes.
Ok I am online today.. I plan on tweeting away.. I also need to help you handle my
When you find that contest, let me know. Each year, for the past 12 years I have said "this is my last e3 ever!"
Swallowing gold fish for tequila is fair game.
Keep it simple via Give them something to talk about-- the community will answer.
Been watching super hero movies all day
I look forward to the day that I don't beat myself up for dumb-ass decisions.
You see the news in a different light the first time you see your favorite news anchor being shitty to an assistant.
Morning, Panthers @ Jets today, not glamorous but at least close to home.
hey is it hard to play the guitar because i really wanna play but i dont know anyone that can teach me
Gone hunting!
When I roll up when I Roll up
rstrnt & Hotel owners in South FL-when watching yr bottom line, thr R ways 2 save $$ rt away w/ no investment call 561.909.9902 for info
Oo , I be on the 2
going to Disneyland for the first time tomorrow...... suggestions??!
Leaving Kalamazoo behind today after a great time and a Rykse's Cinnamon roll
Probably going to Evike today to get some stuff for my loadout!
I love all the movies you play in and I Love You!!
T.G.I.F. It's HAPPY HOUR time! We're open and the bar is ready to serve you up some Friday night 1/2 priced beverages! COME SEE US!
Sometimes, its better to be a fool to go after what we want & need, rather than to regret everything in the end because we never even tried.
Beautiful bar full of beautiful people.
How to determine the best flights to maximize miles flown per dollar ...
Don't want to leave
Did you watch #DWTS last night? rocked it!
Yes sure just like me. :D
Lmao you are something else, you are really something else ": and ima skinny ass nigga"
Tx for follows! RT : #FF to all my peeps making sure wins.
haha yeah hopefully not
okay, I'm about to. Check ur DMs noww...
it's still work, so all the more power to you. I eventually want to be on "the other side" too :)
#fiveguys is the best burger joint there is. Hands down.
I was to even tho I was mad that we lost lol
HEY CHASE......Me and the HUBBY LOVE U.....Keep it up...!! Especially with The BOW-TIED DWEEB.........!!
sent me 😊
currently researching and discussing the history of gentlemen's clubs...
#askjosh boston or boston?..
hey this steve the grillmaster for pops new cheesesteak truck telling rveryone im parked at the elcortez making the best cheesesteakd in
RT If you do not like straight forward sincere person the way an #Aquarius is, then pack your bags and walk away
Agree! #GoBaseball RT : I'm a Cubs and Sox fan!
#20factsaboutme 19) I cry alone in my room sometimes
How was everyone's Christmas??
we haven't announced a date yet :) Will provide updates as soon as they are available. Thanks!
sure how McCoy needs to work on his hands. 168rec in 3 years. And one of few RB's that gets split out and run routes.
Why is the replay not ever avail on Directv??
Is there a live video feed for today's stage?
This kid #HendersonAlvarez just turned 22. Yet, he turns that thing over like
:) RT : That feeling of being remembered by your fave artists<3
OUR pleasure..so much fun GREAT people...They'll go far! RT thx for helping the GFTS. U R Awesome!!
oops never mind. I'm all mixed up. That wasn't yesterday's question! LOL
So tired
Indeed. We referenced them throughout the story as her first sports cards.
Thanks for the follow One of my favorite NYC restaurants. Had one of the best birthdays of my life there :)
dig your Dilla T. thanks for playing some Stevie. #Detroit love
"We all dream of being a child again, even the worst of us. Perhaps the worst most of all." The Wild Bunch (1969). My 60th birthday...
Yes!Shopping it is!c;
Ok what time if you do see me
Marriott chief sings praises for tourism
Are you a good speller? We need your help for today's radio spelling bee at noon Call 410-235-1157 @
sure thing, lovey!
Awsome concert not only for families!
they've just tweeted 2 biased, stereotypical stories in a row and I'm about to Unfollow them. Lame.
party party party! fuck yea rave cant wait!
local, state, or national
Wesch: connect it to real life, get students involved
I like it too lol but I look really tan.
Don't want #astdTK12 to end, but I suppose I better go back and apply what I've learned on the job.
Blown save when Wandy gives you 8 innings of 1 run baseball. Are you kidding me? Ugh, Astros.
yeah, uh. yeah. Moment of grossed-outnness
Ha. He wasn't going. He was made to take a pic with his sis. I'm just glad he smiled. ;)
I've concluded it's context. Pics of beautiful women on Pinterest do really well if from a "Woman's brand"! Yes?
dating can be torture sometimes.
I can't remember an #Eagles draft pick that's gotten universal support. Guess I have to thank KC and Poe for that.
Contract Executive Recruiter for Excelacom. Need exp recruiting sales and consulting exec's. Send resume:
haha ive tried maybe hes just busy an ur lucky(: who are they(: ?
Don't fuck up and speak on it like it should be tolerated
yeah i know those other 2. had the album, just hadnt listened to high. we're in 102, but we're doin remedies now. ill let u know.
You wrote a 50 page article! You really couldn't come up with a 5-10 word title better than that?
Birdsall Law has a Google+ page now. Put us in your circles for updates, legal guides and video blogs.
We are ten followers away!!! 10!!! I'm excited!!!
at a time like this I wished I moved to Orlando with my brothers Ted and Antwon........
RT-ing always a pleasure!
Improv is the act of creating, making something from nothing. Sketch writing is the act of perfecting, making something better.
But you have easier access to great pizza than possibly anyone else on earth!
I meant the crazy proclamation about the backstreet boys new music!
Your gifts can take you somewhere, but you need character to keep you there.
what happened?
umm people? You needa ask me before you wanna say I was talkin about you, I haven't talked about your tweets, your the one
Thanks so much Steve!!
is getting ready for QuakeCon. Only two weeks away now!
Open Mic at the Neighbor Stage across from the Black Box at 3:45-7:15. Have talent? Come share it will us! Stage and sound system provided.
i missed it!
From today I'm an owner of Royal Entertainment, world!))
*curtsies* they're SO good too. I feel like I won a big battle. Lol
have Drysol Rick contact me. Encino is my area 818-780-0701 We'll be happy to provide a free estimate.
I was alway prepared to pull the "Are You Saying I'm Fat?" Card if I got in trouble for wearing skinny pants.
Recently started thinking of my as the display of myself as a human tamagotchi.
i'm only into guys who grab their crotch region in pictures. it's just my thing.
Big purple Barney ass.
true...but I still don't trust him as a qb
Feels like punching somebody in the face but I have to keep it
Order up: 'Trekkie' Teriyaki Burger...for all the Star Trek fans. $10.00 or less!
When is it premiering? omfg.
Well said! RT : Betty just got out-Betty-ed by her own daughter. Happy Mother's Day from
Happy birthday to our dear chorusmaster Ian Robertson! DG rehearsal paused to sing him in to the Act I finale!
who cares about chris brown. no matter how rich or famous they will always remain ghetto, will never learn to behave themsleves.
I think I'm in love ! Haha, gross ....
Thank you love ... You too !! <<<< Now following
Also, had a friendly Ethiopian driver on the way home. Recommended the vegetarian options at Ras Dashen. One of my favorite Ethiopian joints
I think it should be the goal to help audiences learn even when they don't know they are learning!
I guess tripping over my curtain this morning can count as bad luck
And we're off and running. Thanks in advance for following us here on Twitter, we'll keep you updated all the way through #FoodDay on 10/24!
hope you do feel 100% tomorrow. I'll let the manly voice slide. :)
Yeah I will :)
Hey, your boy Vin Gerard is following me. What nice things do you have to say for him? lol
#EveryoneHasThat1Friend who is late for everything so you always tell them to come 30 minutes before something starts. And I'm still late.
Not bad! Won 80 bucks from the Preakness.
You are what you believe you are,you are what you say you can be !
foreigners travel to get quality health care - to Cuba & the U.S. The issue is whether all of us have access to it
lol yea i feel u on that
so!!! Lol stop teasing me
did you see the news about ?
Sure, who am I speaking to and why is Glenn in parentheses at the end of your sentence?
but if she loves me and cares for me like she said she does she will try and make it work right
It was in the ceiling so I scraped out the bits of nest and pushed them out. It would be harder in the side wall, I would think.
I think I live you.....
follow me Justin please.
I always hated kids bop, they are dumb idiots.
EVERYDAY I WAKE UP IS A GUD DAY TEW ME ION LET PPL DECIDE HW MY ATTITUDE OR DAY GOING TEW TURN OUT
Large Real Estate firm in NYC r making a killin in Energy! Don't get left behind if you're a Realtor. Call for details 1-646-397-9817
bonding day with the pops :)
I am a Bay Area portrait photographer; Newborn & Baby Photography - Children's Photography - Maternity / Pregnancy Photography & Family
Going to the mall with friends!!!:)gunna be funn
Studies by the University of Michigan and Johnson & Johnson show advantages of corporate wellness programs including: •$1,100 a year for …
We are experiencing unexpected server outages and are working to remedy the situation. We will post updates as we learn more.
Wishing a very Happy Birthday!
June 2nd I think
and Ron looks more bad ass in that picture
Packing for some West Coast fun; #DLR, a wedding, and headlining. Possibly a sighting of and
SWEET 16 BABY! Is it too early to start thinking about a #Wisconsin/#Marquette championship game?
Where do all the cocky people go after life?
I use spreadsheets exclusive to analyze & rationalize my feelings.... Are you trying to say something?
Getting ready for the best night on tv #TheKilling & #MadMen. Have 2 dvr #NurseJackie & #TheBigC Y can't they spread the wealth?
... Happiness is when what you think, what you say, and what you do are in harmony. ~ Mahatma Gandhi
I really need a nap before I hit the road tonight..
gives great advice! follow follow for relationship,love,and dating help!!
REMINDER! Grammar is playing this Thursday at DC 9 with Prussia. Kicking some new shit
Uh...is this not why we run? RT Just did my third run for #RWRunStreak. To whole foods to buy cream to make homemade ice cream.
Why are the bears so bad? So angry!
I don't think it's in the Cards to win against the Rangers tonight.
RT Highlights in Sports Broadcasting !
Sure thing, buddy. White 'Tweet that' shirt, correct?
Sometimes when I can hear crying from All The Way Down The Hall, I feel like not going back to my classroom. :(
Saw someone driving a Fiat. It wasn't J-Lo :(
M men with long hair...
When people from my school follow me it throws me off, but makes me smile
Burned the roof of my mouth...
Just go ahead and kill off everyone but Daryl. He's the only one worth watching AND prob only one who would actually survive an apocalypse
FOLLOW ME GREYSON!!!! I LOVE YOU!!!!
. If I were less human, I'd agree. "I will not rejoice in the death of one, not even an enemy." - Martin Luther King, Jr
This weekend is gonna be fun wit
Yes! To a creative and productive 2012. Cheers!
You mad ?RT : Caint never get no sleep fuckin with this nigga 
I'd like to nominate predictive text as the worst consumer tech invention of the modern era. STOP TRYING TO CORRECT ME P.T.
but i dislike larry ok.
A pre-interview manicure really helps to calm my nerves :)
No matter where i am in the world and no matter where is in the world. The number 21 will ALWAYS remind me of him<21
First half stats ... Shots: Texas 6, Tech 3 ... Saves: Texas 3, Tech 5
Just kegged up my Cal Common. Thinking I'll take the slurry to work and do a little experimenting.
Out of all the gifts I received, my favorite, by far, were the gift receipts.”
Not feeling reassured by all the sirens I am hearing.
apparently she was sick.....again....like every week. #whythefuckaminotcut?!?!?
How can Andrew Bynum have such an incredible work ethic but play like a lazy piece of crap sometimes?
According to its National Cleavage Day? Go figure i am wearing a low cut shirt...
Thanks new followers and
I'll always have time for you <3
once Terrelle Pryor is drafted, won't player's union just file grievance to overturn suspension once he's a player?
yep, that Scott Walker. Unless you are thinking of another one.
the Bills deserve B-lo At this point no Soon they'll be gone to Toronto Along with TO Jim Kelly's days Now are just a haze
So I think I helped. I can't believe any one is taking sides with her. She did it with one of his good friends. Yelling at a wall helps xD
haha yea pittsburgh is the shit
Lana Del Rey - Born To Die, this song has been in my head the whole day <3
Experienced my first sandstorm last night. Crazy wind, no visibility, breathkng/eating sand- head for the trucks. wow.
Why Microsoft spent $1 billion on AOL's patents: Many assume Google helped drive up the price for AOL's intellectual property. But a ...
You play fantasy Chad?
Would inserting a <link rel="prerender"> to the DOM of a background page work for an omnibox/tabs extension?
#ImagineAustin asked:may I? U: may u what? A: have u forever? U: YES!of course Austin! I love you! A: I love u more! *kiss*
Waiting in line at MedPAC, no early entry for press! Doc fix excitement abounds.
RT : Strippers take quarters instead of dollars. Where are they going to put the quarters? Eww! -YOU are BAD!
30000 miles in 2 months! #united is making a lot of money out of me and i need a plan to stay home for a while
I get to see you today!!!
neoliberalism, hegemonic, and ideology all in one sentence! ah, american studies, there you are...
Thx for the follow ur what all indie horror directors dream of becoming
1 in 5 visitors to a mobile-optimized small business site leads to an immediate call to that business (Google, DudaMobile)
Seriously thinking suicide. Can't say this on Facebook cause ppl would make fun of me.
Great Gatsby paper... Anyone else suffering?
False... The Twins blowing a 3-1 lead in the 8th inning is the worst thing in the world...
you taught me to dream big and never give up!
I just miss the metabolism I had when step aerobics were popular.
Feel asleep early so now im up!
Rip out the wings of a butterfly by him is one good fucking song!
Diet Mountain Dew tastes like pure ass.
You got it. I want it. I'm on it.
Meant to tell u I finished Fairest of All-Love love love the ending! My girls n I r eagerly awaiting Annabelle's story:)
Biz Kids Camps are going really well this week....... I wonder who will win!!!!!! They all have great ideas.
better make it a good one then!
Welcome new followers!
,Watergate was Nixon trying to expose Progressives takeover the Democratic Party,Guns are Fast&Furious killers big differ
You're welcome. Keep up the good work.
Best therapy I know other than KY bourbon! RT Remember, wine is cheaper than therapy.
Well said.
My Pleasure! I like to spread Good News :+D Funny thing, just drove by it yesterday & thought it looked so charming!
- where is the position located?
OK....NO! I saw this the other day and can tell you I have no clue...;) am I gonna like it?
i wonder if youd get high if you ate them? maybe she was taking a que from pot brownies and making pot rabbit stew?
great game today! congrats!
entertaining video!
Sleep,gym,tanning <3
on my way to hubachi grill
Today, we would like to recognize Assurant Health for continuing to support & the St. Pat's Parade!
#dh11 #altac #alt-ac Good point. Though is at McGill in Canada. How might it differ in UK, eg?
Being offered Willingham, Lind & Youkilis (on DL) for Encarnacion, who's ice cold lately. Is he leveling out or just a cold spot?
Heading home from school early. Can't wait to see where Mom and Dad are going to take me for my thirteenth birthday!
I have mad love for the dancing hamsters...seriously...lol
How did dairy queen get prago ? Burger king forgot to cover his whopper
If you didn�t get a negative reaction, that means you�re standing neutral and you have no point of view
I always have an attitude no u jus get on my nerves
hahaha it's ok :D
haribol, prabhu! It's 'tirtha here in Austin. I'm excited about our bakery co-op :)
Taking drinks and medicine to knock me out, but end up being wide awake... this blows. someone text me till i sleep
awww! thanks for cred. miss my WP buddy and those conversations-will integrate WP into my teaching this summer 4 sure
Got a job interview tomorrow goin to sleep at 11
I can't wait for some good soccer action tomorrow and then the UFC fight tomorrow night
RT : RT : everyone staying up to help a sick friend
47 new tunes coming your way next week!! Disappointed we won't be getting them out in March, but darn close!
Nope, just stole it. Releasing an EP tomorrow on Deep Elm Records. “: #naturalcauses will be my next band name”
Sextip: Don't just lie there like the proverbial dead fish. Move around, change positions, be inventive, and wear him out!
Happy Hour all day! Stop on by 4:30-10p.m.
Damn this liquor
I keep tweeting instead of studying . BUT HEY , Austin is more important then a test;)
I gotta get in as many as I can before this nigga comes around when he comes around it's a wrap
love that store. Drive down from Takoma for it. Wish they had more organic produce though.
#Baseball fans follow us & share pics from the #ballpark!
you can get PDFs onto kindle over USB, too... But the zoom functionality is pretty rough once they're on it
Check to make sure your contractor has a license and is insured @ www.cslb.com .
makes it look so easy. And Jay Cutler makes it look so frustrating.
Girl I know how much you really want somebody, want somebody that don't really need you.
Love > Lust
My daughter wants to go to china to get ingredients for her invisibility potion... lol
Stupid giving out red bags at AA Center tonight but wouldnt give one to my son because we are all sportin the red & black
#aasl11 social media can be used for the power of good, to build a community. Gasper Marturano @ The Learning Commons
LOL! My brother lives in the Mango Capital of the Northern United States. :) I'm sure he'd love those mangoes!
you guys coming back for the holidays?
did you end up liking WHITECHAPEL? I remember you started watching it recently.
Was it on a local channel or cable? Would like to watch that.
Expose yourself to your deepest fear; after that, fear has no power, and the fear of freedom shrinks and vanishes. You are free.
I am proud that the tools given to me have enabled me to be an agent of peace and to hold to my promise of undying loyalty.
just killed it at the 930 club!
thanks for hooking up my bro mark with the sb ticks your the man
Don't worry, they come back (for Mother's Day)! Tweeting from my parents' place ;)
gangster party at the dmv
Don't data puke everywhere -- strategy before data.
of course everyone decides to get loud whenever I wanna take a nap
Need some excitemnet!!! Have been a bit board lately.
My iPhone's autocorrect has learned to spell Yuengling.
#Harbaugh says #Ravens "never hold a walk thru" the term is "forbidden"
Oh Duke LAX night.....
i smell like bbq
RT : True sadness is reaching the bottom of a cup of Potbelly's chili.
The Association of Rehabilitation Nurses thanks for her inspiration and service to our country.
happy birthday Emma!!! Hope ur birthday cake candle wish comes true!!
I'm so nervous
Life's most persistent and urgent question is, 'What are you doing for others?'- Martin Luther King
I'm in Louisville on location filming "Intrusion Disconnected".
There is film of Aaron hitting pennant clinching home run here in 1957 w/voice of late Earl Gillespie
Just received the best text message ever. Thank you for making my day!
The moment when someone jokes about one of your insecurities and you have to act like it didn't bother you.
Was trying to see if anyone recognized the movie with all those silly lines. Miller's Crossing. Lebo got it immediately
Out and about this weekend? Make sure to check out the Death to Dollars exhibition! You only have a few more weeks left before it ends!
People get mad about others opinions....that's sad.
Friday evening elation. Golden sunshine, family, music....yum.
Sometimes I want to ditch your body in the woods. Yes, YOU. Damn you.
IF & my bab Dont go to my show,Ima be mad cause I wont be able to see my bab!:/
what up bro!
The Worst DJs In The World now playing a taunting jingle about someone who is "bigger than a scholbus".
I drink beer out of a bottle cause that's what real women do.
Congrats! RT : This summer I will be working as a Marketing Assistant at #AmericasLargestWaterpark #NoahsArk!!!!!!
This episode feels like #MadMen had a baby with The Office (U.K.)
RT Another attack on DIY bar #Yerevan. No to #fascism posters burned, swastikas painted on walls. 2 reportedly detained
MAD, MAD PROPS to who built and designed our site. It looks awesome and is functioning flawlessly. WELL DONE.
I have a theory that the chicken crossed the road because of all the weirdos that were watching him
Finally making it outside my apartment for the first time today. Last night was amazing but holy shit am I destroyed today
I just realized that looks a lot like a grown up version of the little boy from Mary Poppins.
Thanks! Glad you like the podcast!
What's going on with the news end of the world may 21st what is that
Mj did his thank 2 all supporters that came outw/ S.A. Films
don't get mad, get even
when I have a bigger apt ;)
gahh they are perfect :P
Good Plan! RT : I'd LOVE to get together: I'm face down working on a deadline for this level of Blaire Sees Bears, play by ear?
Only low life's bring kids into an argument! #PunkAssBitch who says things about kids? You're so grown and mature though right?!
(: Glad ur a fan of his now!
Giving in on socks and boots...brrr! Grrr... :|
lmbo that's not nice
are you drinking fluids and sleeping, I mean more so than usual.
And the triathlon training begins haha
Just Open a New Bailbondsman Office In Broward... 786-445-2171 I'm Here For You..
OMG TAKE ME
$3 You Call Its For Happy Hour Tonight!! Come on Down and finish your long weekend with us!!
I like you. You like me. Stop worrying about them. Worry about us.
They probably will win both.
Lady at #ctia registration askedbif my name was pronounced 'Reesee'. Um, no. Last E is silent. Like the candy.
To all the teachers across America: we wish you a great 2011-2012 school year. Thank you for helping to make #RealChange happen. Please RT
Get ready for your hug! Countin down the days til Orlando.
Thanks for the link. You are so very right. What a great example a museum living up to the words in its mission.
Asked Siri to remind me to do something. Obviously she wasn't listening because when reminder went off it said, "Find some crack".
glad you liked it! Maybe we can get to perform his solo at the apartment?
That's for sure. I heart that guy!!!!
#mn you were awesome!
he knows that i love him more and that he is my whole life and that is how i won
how old is he?
You can now make play lists on #myspace. Oh, and the new album is rad.
the feeling of growing apart with an old friend is a truly sad one
The only way you can counter absurdity is with greater absurdity. :-)
Can some one update me on Christopher drew any new songs i wanna no
Bad day?
you have indeed sir. I think your parenting cannot achieve a higher goal.
(gmail dr) doesn't this just go to show can't believe the "cloud"?
good morning people..
“Love isn't a state of perfect caring. It is an active noun like struggle....
Relaxing night at home.
Oh hell. Updated my iPhone and all of my photos were deleted! $&@#!!!
Great My Own Fingerprint photo shoot in Hollywood - the models were amazing!
The balloon is at 34,000 feet!
Spot trending now in Chicago, IL: Bella Bacinos - Italian (live updates)
maybe you should try rehab. It worked for Lindsay Lohan...
Ok... that's what I thought. Thanks!
Playing Charades with the girl I like... Picked 'Sex & the City'... super awkward!
You still Looked Beautiful! Get ready gorgous big meeting in NYC on the 11th :) SO proud of you!!!!!
OH: Is she derpy cute?
Just tried to pre-order the but the purchase site seems to be all B2B...I will wait until there is an easier path.
Yeah, I wasn't sure.. thought I'd give it a shot.
loved ya then.. Love ya now! Wish the CMA's would acknowledge your talent!
How is it 3:45 already?
ATY Radeon x1600. It's a shit card, but I played the beta...no idea why now it isn't working. No drivers.
*Correction*, Co-sponsors. Still no primary author.
The linchpin of the Council drinking game is retiring? Say it ain't so!
naa dude I just woke up lol
yes, he is. He mentioned that Sen. Graham is running late and Sen. Leahy is unable to make it
I know nobody likes me. I didn't need you to tell me.
#NowPlaying #Beautiful Sinner
Musicians are finicky people.
QoTD: "Men's best successes come after their disappointments." (Henry Ward Beecher)
Follow Us! BostonOnTheRun
Forgive me for my disrespect, forgive me for my lies
I asked a question at 10 about the big "X" at the airport. Overwhelming response from people explaining it is a closed runway.
The B52s on the #tvlandawards NOW !
you would never be second string with me :))
Feeling ambivalent about my exams this week... I feel like I might be prepared, but at the same time I'm afraid I'm being complacent :/
visit anytime--love to have you!
Incidentally, soccer fans, I recommend the BBC's 5 Live radio broadcasts. Long live the interwebs.
Works for my dog Jasper. RT "Why can't wars be decided by peeing on things?" -- A pacifist pee fetishist
Down in St. Louis, getting ready for J's #marathon tomorrow!
I'm getting kinda pissed off over this shit
LOL @ "coz ur a fob" ...hahahaa, true cuz, I need to get over it. And look at you with all that strength #POLYNESIANPOWER lol
If she will give you the last dollar out of her pocket,Then she a real woman
That would be so awesome to have both, then this would be a city fulfilled with sports.. We do support our teams well>>
Marty swears I like Jude, omg
Lovely meeting you all
Di grace a god
kebo what up homie u still got the same gmail my nigga?
1st to Tweet "Griswalds" wins a Chrismas Vacation Ultimate Blu-ray Collector's Edition!
indigo in hyde park? Love that place. often go there with my dad when I visit back home
Chill on the hill in good ol' Bayview
Hi Alessandro, is Unify is adding that HTML?
you coming to bvu lunch and learn tomorrow?!?
Man its to damn early for her to be having an attitude
Big ass bags of weed look like im finna take the trash out...
we should too...
Of course, i keep some bad women with me in the back sippin rozay with some hash twisting
thanks for chatting :-)
Epic fucking night. Stopped by tylers and el patio in simi. On the way to Alisa's in camarillo.
Hello old friend! Still got an egg for a profile pix, I see :0)
so how many tweets are you getting about your penis right now
thank-you!
text 99888 and put the number 1 in the text to vote for !
Cheetah hunt bitch! _changeG$
OMG RNG !!! Their preformence was DOPE!
can you please tweet some more quotes soon? I need my ghetto hikes fix.
No ricky, No Pek, No J.J. NO PROBLEM. Some Monday morning greatness.
There's more cheddar there....RT : 23rd right now tho!
thanks! “: So happy you're running! I ... am spreading info about you to friends/family in the 915”
AY! what's good over there?
RT Tonight is kind of like LeBron going to his ex-fiance's home with a bride on each arm.
Girl at Coney Island wanted me to sign my receipt, but didn't hand me a pen. Dumb bitch.
Society would be a lot better off if people understood that responsibility outweighs entitlement.
Why can't LeBron have more contrite and humble pressers like his exit interview? Is he finally realizing how cocky he comes off?
Our duty is to be useful, not according to our desires but according to our powers
I wanna see Jack attack those fuckers with a plant.
Hey, thanks for the retweet and excited you started a IA group! Can't wait to hear how it turns out!
After a little convincing from me and testing the bacon packages for explosive traces, TSA let me (and the bacon!) through.
BIG BLUE 99 yard TD pass!!
Family guy gettin old
This week should fly by quick!
thinking about hitting some golf balls...
Early Morning Workout
It was worth the wait! The Game of Thrones second season premiere was amazing!!
Thank you for sharing my pain. Miss you!
RIP Vidal. Let us know if there's sasooning in heaven.
people keep telling us that. I think we must be at some sort of limit and so when I follow people it I follows them.
What's the buzz? Who is hot right now in alternative land? We have some ideas, but, YOU tell US!
Never again
I'm sure I could shoot 25% against the Heat.
it was a pleasure to meet u too. And don't fret about the screening. It was canceled but next time you're totally invited
what a great idea!
I have finally defeated the chapped lip phenomenon of winter
wanna go tomorrow?
Jamie Moyer has 268 wins now-- tied with Jim Palmer and more victories than Bob Feller or Carl Hubbell or Bob Gibson or Juan Marichal.
Welcome to the twitterverse! :)Thanks for the follow.
Can i be your Nandos ? So that you can eat me ! :DD
that's only because Steve trachsel is out of the game
You know the Brewer game has gone WAY too long when we are on the 2nd sausage race of the game!
Wondering what to do with yourself this glorious Saturday morning? We have the answer: have brunch with us. That was easy.
Great blog post about attracting young(er) audience. We're a museum, but points still apply. Thanks!
When I saw Funny People this morning I quite enjoyed it. Probably the least of the
Peter, I haven't seen you in months!! How is everything? And acting?
Looking forward to watching the Tour of Flanders at 8:30 am this morning on NBC Sports. Go Garmin!
yes it was renewed. I meant how things ended between Charlie & that show.
You should try "Krave" granola! That and special K are my favorites! Yumm<3 LOVE YOU SO MUCH PLEASE FOLLOW<3
i been had a tumblr and i go on it way more than i go on twitter!! its so addicting it has amazing pics and it is way better than twitter:)
Can't wait to see your pics! I absolutely LOVE alpacas! :)
no he didn't lol. Is he still there?
For today's #WineWednesday, may we suggest our Bin 36 2010 Zinfandel? It pairs great with our Smoked Tomato and White Bean soup.
Any bands need a New Years gig at Minglewood Hall? DM us ASAP!
Extra frames, fun game RT : Mariners!
You may have hit upon the reason!
#ifiDontGetBelieveTickets ill hang myself
Sorry your worst boarding in months! #flight949 why is the gate area blocked?
I wanna faithful one ♥to</3
Great! Keep us posted!
.... bryanna vera Watch, she's gonna see this.
eagles are dog shit
#ThatDepressingMoment when you realize that you can't possibly fix every broken soul.
wat everybody doin im bored than a mutha rite now.
118 cappers posted today and 7 consensus from their plays off a 4-2 consensus day...Off to Station Casinos MM party and banquet Sat...
Josh, are you currently working on Pinterest with a few of your brands? You may be interested in
Q mal me siento :'(
Total Knockout Kisses!
now following my guy >>>>> he new so follow my guy btw see you tomorrow!
you're gonna catch a cold from the ice inside your soul . So don't come back for me . Don't come back at all .
What's your Vandy connection?
Let's do it!
Are you participating in tomorrow? If you are, direct message us with details and we might stop by and pray with you!
I think we need to cancel #SOTU opposition response. The setting of the House Chamber is never matched and makes the opposition look weak.
How did I not know you had a twitter? Let's go more brewer games!
One of my best friends live in Lincoln. You know the Schleppenbachs by any chance? -Adam
less than 5 months until The Script :D
Rode 17.1 mi on route 'Work & home', in N/A (avg: 0 mph) on my 2009 Gary Fisher bike.
I'm liking DC's Earth 2 title. Its a new fresh challenge using under-used characters in a new way. Golden Age Today.
My psychiatrist told me I was crazy and I said I want a second opinion. He said okay, you’re ugly too
do you really think sucking up to someone makes you friends?
I had FSU in the final game as well...I swear if you know too much you will never win.
hahahha yeah seems like it ;)
RT : Calling all AU alumni! RT us so we can reach 2K followers by 4/30, and we'll send you AU goodies, so you can show your...
Hell yeah! Through Being Cool would definitely be on ours.
Good thing Rooney Mara's acting is way better than her fashion sense
It's windy as fuck.
I'm honestly working on not caring about my people not supporting. I don't think it can ever be 100%, but I need to get close to that.
get it my niggy
Congratulations!!! Love you!
can get rough when meds take over:-/
Yes I have to work and stay busy. Need the exercise. Wear respirators all the time.
a Palinesque fantasy intriguing !
I know the entire Xena: Warrior Princess intro monologue by heart, holy
I'm sure you're a good reporter, but you and your POS network look really bad with how they continue to hammer
Unreal performance..
aww sounds amazing(:
One more follower and we hit 300! Help us out with a shout out and you will be our best friend :)
RT : : Catch me at Endless Music THURSDAY w/ the ATL
it's not in Omaha, but Benson raised 's film #canyonroad is debuting trailer tomorrow at
I'm officially the best packer ever. My bag weighed in at 50 lbs EXACTLY! Farewell, Colorado! Until we meet again...
WOW 145 cappers with plays on tonights short card and 6 consensus now in college and 1 NHL and is all available FREE
I might be a cuddle whore
me and you HAVE to meet and Rob someday!!! :)
I'm rude. Quiet .. gives fucksless.. speaks my mind mhm (: yup
“: she got to get unfollowed for that shit”not to much
I am sorry but I really don't consider "Apple Ipad runs 12 degrees hotter" to be *breaking news* that needs a push notification.
Its always an interesting day when we are equated to space aliens and livestock! lol
I know! I suck
shower time. :)
I hope it rains. ☔ cause its been hot and humid lately.☀
sure thing!
“: So fun! : Having the best Easter belated bday ever! Champagne tasting w/ @ justinherman &
the have shown winning and grinding mentality the whole season.
Some people are so damn hard to live with, or even be around. Your shity mood rubs off on everyone.
ha your in denial.. mine is clearly dope shit ;)
- wonderful! So glad to hear it -
I get off at 5pm - let's go together.
Its a nice day for a parade.
pfft whatever. By the way answer ur messages. You're so busy being a bloody lamb you got no time to write now? Lol
i just want food and for you to text me more often.
top of the morning to ya :)!!! L
Tell me, where do you stop? Can you comment of institutional preservation?
What do you think about splitting the supreme court into two courts? I want to know!
i am enjoying this.
The highlight of my father's only trip to the Holy Land was at the Garden Tomb.This is his first Easter enjoying this hope from heaven.
Hey, you can talk to Liesje on twitter at
Anyways, about to watch Jedgar.
follow and get more followers
OH: "...like, spread yr cheeks, if you know what I mean!"
“: is my favorite player in #ithasbeenannounced” I'd rock a Suter Ponies jersey all day.
the first things men look at when they see a woman. hands to check for rings,
oh hold your horses. children are one of my top 5 fears…right after snakes and mold.
Happy Labor Day Weekend from the Black Lab Theatre. Hope you all enjoy the extra day off!
This bitch stay off in my ear, talking dat shit I don't wanna hear...
SOLD. Where's my ticket?
I went into The Blackbird to talk to Joey about our grandmother being in the hospital,and he Kicks me out!
That awkward moment at a feminist picnic when they realize no one made sandwiches
hum... i think the wizard is stealing 's thunder...
Jazz also seems to exist in a weird universe of polar opposites...either ridiculously traditional or way out in left field
Twitter, please tell me where I want to move/work. I am at a loss.
ok, but only if u check me out on FB. Look at my drawing on there.
Have fun creating your new line! I'm also starting a new spring jewelry line. :)
Cheers! Keep up the good work!
Be present, Spirit of God, within us, your dwelling place and home. ~RT
awesome, thanks so much! Good luck! :)
Messed up shit today! !
Can't wait for the new season!
Can't wait for Charlotte, NC show with Baylor's Eye and Final Curse! Horns Held High!!!!
Dried apricots. Just not a whole bag. #lessonlearned RT: Q9 #Foodiechats u have a #SweetTooth What healthy option do u choose?
This game is a ridiculous defensive showdown.
you gonna bring that heisman home to Ann Arbor this year
#13 #TheLastTimeIChecked It's about a personal relationship with #Jesus not religion. #GodlyBroTips Matt. 23:15
Thank u sir
He should be...brutal ": If I know Aaron Craft, he will be pretty despondent after the game."
Is that bad I don't know what that is yet..?
Pie (numerical value) >>>> Felix Pie
I'll love you forever
Blow me.
I wish someone would come right now and wash my hair!
shoe obsession; 4 new pairs in the past 2 weeks. 20 year long fan and still going strong!
dropbox was offering extra space for testing that feature. I'm up to 18G free I think.
Miracle pull
school < anything else.... :P
I'm having an #everythingisstupid moment right now.
. I am surprised the percntages are that high!
What A Shame! Such a marvelous artist. A gorgeous human being. To end at 48 is a tragedy. Poor creature.
Thanks to the best vocal coach in the world !! Mama Jan !! love you so much !!
On This Day in 1982 - The first issue of "USA Today" was published.
it was great to see you at Reboot
Just finished watching a cut of Life Tracker. I'm getting excited. It's really coming together!
like they do to the rest of us making us look smart lol
": what song is that?" Me u and Makey..
i had a softball game today and i wore your necklace for good luck. we won, we won just for u prince. Happy Birthday 1-4-3
Foot feels better!! Time to hit the road and do a short LA trip. LA here I come!
great coffee shop on 21st. Do you even live in Nashville? Haha
Tomorrow, it will be either Neon Indian or The Globes.
go to sleep.
MATTHEW HAS MUH PHONE
any other theme that doesn't ship with core
I am currently taking donations for a pair of Jeffrey Campbell shoes, help a girl out!
We would like to welcome our new students to the August session at Harriet Fulbright College!
First annual Phil's Friends Golf Outing on August 4th! More info: www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=120833574598625 or www.philsfriends.org
Happy birthday to The Greatest of All Time: Muhammad Ali!!!!!
More comfort and drive knowing that you have enchanting options
hey hey hey. How are you?
Come up town! At least hit the Trading Post. RT : I'm hungry AF. But I'm at Keuka college.
!! RT niggas be so fake they don't know what to do with themselves ctfu
Don't you hate when you tell somebody you will do somethin an they say "no I got it" then get mad cuz they have to do it. Told I would !
Follow he is doing his thing and lookout for tour dates with Florida legend the original Mr. 305 JT Money!!
well, he'll never know unless he tries!
75% of Japanese women own a vibrator. The worldwide average is about 47%.
“: "I like girls that have small hands cause it makes my dick look bigger!"” 😂😂
Thank you for calling a special session. They need to act like adults and do their jobs!
Thanks so much!! ": "Hold hands, you lovebirds!" ...congrats in tying the knot!"
Discussing the finer aspects of journalism with on the 107th floor of
Never again will I love another man in my lifetime. Love is just another 4-letter word...
Just realized that liking soccer and becoming invested inMLS is like loving art and getting REALLY into Portland's gallery scene.
Great game #Sixers! Only lost by 1
": I like you. You like me. Stop worrying about them. Worry about us."
welcome to tone's house party party
I want to be on the show
“Live by the spirit of faith.”
Hey guys! receive 30% off hair extensions and accessories this month when you log on to Clipitz.com and use coupon code: I076T52ID5
Can't believe my sister is graduating tonight.
Morning y'all. We're still awake. The #100innings of Baseball heads into the 71st inning with Team Lembo 71, Team Rudy 56.
These industry things are always very interesting...
Lmaoo Naw You Only Talk to Me When I Got Food ....
Is anyone getting work done or just watching NCAA Men's Basketball March Madness?
You got all the questions I know all the Answers.. I done took ya heart girl hold it up for Ransom
lol well now you know what to do next time :]
Call our informative sales staff today at (888) 378-5237, or come and visit us in person at 5700 S 27th Street.
Girls these days be trippin
Thanks for the feedback and support.
Heading to Indy tomorrow. Should be a blast.
Don't got much but I take wat ever I get
I went running in my new #fivefingers earlier and now my calves are sore as hell. Can't wait to do it again tomorrow!
Maybe a little sheer sparkle?
Guess i need to spend some time on here. Can only #Follow 5 tweeps at a time due to lack of activity. I will #Follow all back!
Yasssss! LOL RT : well, we may have to get a special booth. We love our
5 days to go for FANSHOES FIFA International fashion show displaying our country spirited shoes, 32 teams partaking in the 2010 world cup.
With each accomplishment take a knee....a humble spirit allows more room for growth <3 <3
Thanks! I really appreciate the advice!
Starting the Long Island wine tour with Pindar. I know I'm spoiled by living in CA, but let's give this a try!
Friends don't let friends do stupid things •••Alone•••
so you're not lazy. :)
I Took The Pic! RT : lol and they knowingly allowed you to snap the picture? Smgdh
- I use both. Have them sync via Google Sync / CalDav. Totally easy and you can use both to update.
We got baseball bats like them Indians and my team pop off like cowboys
when we release everything i'll be sure to send it right to you! thank you for always being there you the best! :)
Is it raining? (sarcasm)
Ridiculous how you can find tons of tutorials to color correct in #fcpx but nada for sound design. Sound > color
I soo dont wanna go back 2 school!!! I didnt do much this summer:(
Ha :-) Yes, a lot of poop around! RT : and a lot of poop!!!
loving the inspiration! Thanks for sharing!!!
you have a nice butt
#conflictparty Boy & Bear rocked it!
My best buddy just posted a pic of the #supermoon on #Facebook. Looks amazing. I'm on a plane so I cannot see it yet but i want to.
I'm just gonna sit here and tweet about awkward things. I have a very weird obsession with Narwhals. I love them to pieces <3
Retired State Police Colonel Tom Foley wrote a book on the Whitey Bulger chase
UL fans welcome
haha that's cool :) lol and really :P ? And let me guess are you listening to Davina :D lol ?
Found in 19th Century Masterfile: The evolution of newspaper advertising, 1897 is Lippincott’s Magazine
Yeah, it's pretty amazing how similarly the communities respond, as least in the article.
no problem sweetheart((:
Looks like we're shutting PDX down tonight. Just make sure your at The Society nightclub. That's all.
Bum ass hoes taking pics in front of the DFACS office
I had an amazing tonight at the concert. Thanks so much to for an incredible show. It's great to see people who just love music
You really need to quit taking my picture. Ha! Glad you had a good time.
German sausage jokes are the wurst.
that is so beautiful :O
A love like the movie The Lucky One
watching the #SwaggaRite ClockWork
Summer = ice cream in hand...log onto www.s2yd.com and check out what Carnival's has to offer
May Andrew's voice live in all of us who value Liberty! Take up his mantle and continue his fight, my friends. Bless you, Andrew and RIP.
Stop time? Now that's a concept...
Somethings need to come back into fashion. Women wearing gloves and hats. Men wearing hats (not just basball caps), more suit wearing too.
Got our copy of 's Monkey Truck today! Such a fun book for preschoolers. Monkey Truck will be released Jan 18th!
Dude... Anyway.... 9 MINUTES.
long week of hard work..now resting my back a little and then heading out.
Great heroes need great sorrows and burdens, or half their greatness goes unnoticed -Peter S. Beagle
seriously! I tried to watch once to see what it was all about. I would have done better to watch "Grease"
I love it. and also i had to use one of you twitts on my fb MY BACK IS NOT A VOICEMAIL SO SAY IT TO MY FACE so true
cheap timberland online for sale | longking
Great presentation today from Tracey at Ready, Set, Grow Marketing!
Recent studies are saying mothers of children with #autism earn 56% less income. What are your ideas on how to overcome this or...
It'd be hilarious if a terrorist blew stuff up so everyone would read his manifesto, but he had really bad handwriting so no1 understood it.
thanks for the time you gave & me 2day, hope u solved that bug issue at home #huskers, #ketv & thanks !
Taylor reads our diaries. can I please have it back? You seem to have transferred it into music ;)
thanks so much Kristina! Hope to see you soon!!
Yes...Sup pitched great. ~sigh~
Well Dad, it basically comes down to this: I've decided to quit geology and join the Village People.
Watching news stories from Lexington glad we drove home Saturday after the half marathon. Craziness there in KY!
Very Nice post on Jopa and Jaypa.
Breaking News: Foreclosures are stopped indefinetly..
I just sludged thru 8 million Bills tweets to find last week's playlist...nothing. Please post! #whatisthenameofthatsong?
or playing the Nigerian lottery.
haha of course you do
POWTY/JCC kids are home with their family and now we'll be home in time for Latke's birthday!
could u give me a shoutout please??
everything just keeps getting worse
Solo until the end ....
Is it wrong to take a nap when I've only been awake for 2 hours?
in love with your icon
that sounds like the summary of a gay porn.
Love when my car starter actually decides to work, I may survive the bitter cold of Rochester after all!
She's a badass b**** and I love it. “: Michelle Obama was viewed favorably by 71% in a new poll survey; Ann Romney by 41%.
Thank you! The welcome has been so warm today :)
Thanks for mentioning us!
Boo come back to Indy
I didn't know I had unfollowed you. Following back again.
listening to #Prokofiev Sonata #9 - amazing and underestimated piece.
FUN FACT: One of the many British slang terms for a Female's Period is - Auditioning Satan's "Little Fingers." Source: God No! by ...
Damn....catching up on my Ringer episodes!!! This show is so good!!
suree now you wake up, you just missed the twitcam!
Just finished two great estate planning books: “Wealth in Families” & “Beating the Midas Curse”. Must reads to say the least!
Tutorial: Recycled Bangle. Check it out!
I LOVE YOU❤🆔
"Technology is an enabler, the success of your program will depend on its management." - at
Gym Class Gyros
Putting together an informative presentation on ageless design for the upcoming Environments for Aging conference.
nommin on some tea and special k...sadly, my fruit supply has diminished
we can probably get you right back the way you were. I don't want to step on your uncles toes tho! We've got awesome tools!
Im at jordans
lawd, come chill tomorrow
aint noone got shit on the cupcakes i made, i mean paid my lil sis to make! lol i frosted them white with some sprinkles LOL !
corn muffins for Chili and soups!
I have stomach ache ahh
haha yeah, it was silly :)
Justin Bieber is amazing, and just living his dream.. So don't say you want him to die just because you don't like him
"With respect, we're letting ourself into your house to take your tv. But we'll fix it up & you can come over and watch it!"
Thanks for telling us about how you are celebrating Jazz Appreciation Month
I apologize to for my #obesity rant- it irks me like Jose Conseco irks her.
An intellectual is someone whose mind watches itself
I Got a Free Ping Pong Racket - ping pong paddle butterfly
James Schuyler, Selected Poems
I'm toasting this tweet tonight! Luv You Obee!!!!!!!!!!
Now this is cool: I just got an invite to be a guest at an upcoming Wizard World Comic Con! Now to decide which one ...
that's what I'm gonna do . Let's go Portugal ;)
If u miss #BESTOFTHEBEST comedy show
I need some good sex
Seth put Benydryl in my drink...sabotage. Lots of Benydryl.. going a sleep a hallway...NY club..Seth you little.....
I'm such a nostalgia junkie. Just signed up for !
they make life worth loving!!
Enlighten us.
is that a Nielsen stat?
nights like these make me wonder why we even question it .
drink the Starbucks now and the energy drink at lunch. Brilliant(: TY!
When ESPN guys talk more about TWEETS than SPORTS, it's time to hang up the jockstrap!
IM NOT LIVING RIGHT IF UR NOT BY MY SIDE!
rub my head! :D pet me like a dog! lmfao
ryan can youu please follow me ? :DD
were you or brittany on the dr phill show in the audience? Thought I saw you...
she is just like her mother:-)
ohmigod "song poems"
xD RT #Leo's are so hot they turn themselves on.
The sound of the raindrops on my skylight is very comforting.
Friends, is playing tonight at Go to there.
i think i mite bring hoe ass (:
Follow our new account , and you'll be entered to win a brand new Roomba 530 ($299.99). Follow us by 6.21.09 to be entered!
They are the HUGEST regret and waste of time I ever spent in my life >.>
I want a dog so badly too, but my cat would have none of it.
Appalachia has lost its mountain tops: See 3/3
Seeing the same close-minded #SXSW first world, upper-middle class presumption that everyone has a smartphone.
The New York Mega Millions Lottery Jackpot is now at $540 MILLION Dollars. What would you with $540 Million Dollars?
they do when they go against Sonia Gandhi.
Haha! BTW I'll be ordering more slather!!! Love that stuff!
RT : It’s #FF, You Should Be Following:
Early markers of toxic excess is mild intestinal discomfort-including cramps, flatulence, gas & bloating.
RT : People hate on happiness, period.”
I am looking for candidates to perform free Health and Wellness Assesments on, please let me know if you would be interested!
I feel the only benefit of suffering is being better equipped to help others with theirs. Can't wait to exchange hugs. HNY <3
i have back sweat and kind of feel icky.
Can you ask Mitch McConnell if this is good? RT MSNBC graphic. From Jan 09 to Feb 2012 the public sector has lost 584,000 jobs
Did you know? May is National Hepatitis Awareness month -- and >65% of people infected don't know! Get tested May 19! (official testing day)
Calling it a day and letting everyone know that Tango Tuesdays and S.I.N. Night are cancelled next week. They'll resume the following week!
Art of Design event tonight! from 8-12am live ice sculpting, welding, massive Old Milly and PBR cans being painted! Beer,food!
Follow for updates from the game. #Badgers vs.
People are driving like fuckin idiots today
well played, my dear. WELL PLAYED.
Excited about adaptive payments (preapproved + chained) announced by PayPal at
I find the smug look of David Stern off putting. Isn't it about time for a change of direction in personnel for the NBA?
I think Brian McKnights rap name should be Dr. Showoff
I wonder where that dream cam from haha.
Santorum winner in North Dakota, Romney projected winner in Idaho. Ohio still too close to call
Heading to the red carpet.
I have not yet! But thank you so so so so so much bea!!
Well thanks for taking the public embarrassment. :) ps we made you a bttm lol
Some family trees have beautiful leaves, and some have just a bunch of nuts. Remember, it is the nuts that make the tree worth shaking.
#UseTittiesInAMovieTitle The day the titties stood still ;D
Hello Marketing team.
And anything is better than Tebow.
Her status said [NoLamez]...bt he didn't get the message....
You know the feeling when you really wanna say to someone.... And then the relief when you actually do it
That's the thing, Artest is stonecold CRAZY. Who does OKC have that can rock with him?
very..have you seen the whole thing?
don't:) it happens to everyone<3
Can I visit and test drive an R8? I #WantAnR8 and would like to test drive this week.
A single man can and will kiss as many as possible. Come on it's New Years!
Who else out there feels really great about their cracked I phone?
You guys dropped the ball at WonderCon. Get the merch out before opening! Come on now.
jatlin <3 cause they are REAL
The inconsistency in his rulings are inexplicable. Like it says in the article, seems like he's throwing at a dart board...
Thin-skinned.
Until Big Play RAY can practice...
it was fun!!! my hair and make up looked great! :)
WE killed the 5 on 3!!! Quick that was amazing :)) Great D too!!!!
I had a surge in creativity. Sorry to fill your inbox :)
OK. Thank you!
I'm about to pay y'all in pizza slices for y'all trading advice lol
glad you loved it :)
I feel like korn is in the house!!!! Awesome!!!
Spurs vs Clips! Lesssgoooo!!
next year maybe we'll try the bnf approach and bring everyone up on the stage at once! :)
lets go lol jk well it was nice talking to you cutie:)
Shout out to my network - Booyah is hiring! Check out some of these positions and get ahold of me or pass on to your friends and colleague…
Thanks, and happy Friday to you, too!
I hear he keeps da beast well groomed me likey lol
Why is it that the cat always wants to cuddle into the guy (me) who is allergic to it? Inquiring minds want to know.
Austin's mom "security said there was over a thousand people there" Austin "who's telling the story here?"
thanks Adam, we cant seem to find enough people. Its an odd problem
For Thirsty Thursday you should try out the new
4G a ma'fucka works quick but drain the battery bout time you take it off the charger
bonus points for your "location" ! and thanks for the follow!
I think more glorifying than The Avengers movie itself, is knowing which movies put those actors on the map. Great cast. Reap that reward
See, you can't hate till you participate.
Happy Birthday to !
I guess my dog think im in the bed too early. he got too much energy.
RT : Not so keen on that hash tag. The kind of joke that gets you locked up or deported or both!//#blackoutkorea still lives,so...
Good Afternoon World!
I believe that you will outlive the pain in your heart.
I got Wisconsin losing to OSU in the elite 8 so I'm in trouble if that upset occurs
Oh crap! Now I got Cyndi Lauper's song "The Goonies 'R' Good Enough" in my head. So freakin' pop and nostalgic.
Probably meant holodecks, developers like to hang out there sometimes.
Being a real man, doesn't mean you f**k 100 girls. being a real man means you stay with 1 girl, even when 99 others are chasing you
2nd day of Early Voting.... Punch #21!
Yes ma'am!! That's exactly what I'm talking about.
It is called Everything Cast Iron Cookbook and is about $11 on Amazon. Chapter 1 are recipes for a new skillet. :)
My brother is a good person, and everyone should know that. And if you don't your life sucks 
we at the house
It's not that I'm a nihilist, it's just that I believe human existence has no objective meaning, purpose, or intrinsic value.
WE PRODUCE TV COMMERCIALS MUSIC VIDEOS IMAGE PIECES WEBSITES 2 FIT YOUR BUDGET we have a program to fit you!!
RT !!!!!!!!  “: People could say whatever they want about me, I'm still going to be fierce and fabulous 💁”
Yo I ain't sat and looked thru my TL in a good Lil minute.. I'm fuckin up...
tl is boring, i need to follow new people.
haha I wish I'm only 16! But it is my golden birthday tomorrow! 17 on the 17th😄
Two strangers completely made my day today. Random acts of kindness. ❤
Thanks for the RT !
Whats good my man!! good to meet you at the Music Video Premiere!!
I can't believe how fast this year is going by.
North Carolina please Vote NO
Robert Algieri: best way for lawyer to improve your personal brand? Smile on your website bio photo!
I can do whatever you want. <3
though, to be fair, they didn't look _that_ much like beating us either. Unlucky today, but lucky at DC and CHV so...
my stomach is ready WoOWOwoWOWo
cool. email me at and i'll send you the information. let me know when you email me so I can check it.
What about the other 5*?
Still got lots to do and the day doesnt end until it's AL done!
I cant admit it out loud because ive spent so long convincing myself that it doesnt exist.
That horrible moment when your contact decides to help out the back of your eye and not come back.
We have some of the best fans ever. #TeamOtenki you all rock! - Enoma aka
RT : #ff The Chicago Jazz Festival is on twitter!! Follow along for all the latest jazz fest info!
Kill me dead, I feel like an overblown balloon with a little bit of water inside. Fucydhvufjf
Orange roughy can live up to 120 years. Most caught are juveniles. Give 'em a break, get something else for dinner.
cleaning my closet to unpack and i didn't realize how much i missed my clothes!!! <3 <3 <3
Happy birthday to the sexiest person I know
I want a man that will treat me good.
Found a pack of skittles!!? ( ) time for a COOLMORNING 2 replay!!! It's gonna be sweet and hilarious! #yeee !!
Who wants 25% off food and drinks? You do. Come to the Copabanana @ 3rd & South tonight between 6-10. I'm guest bartending.
thanks! Ill check it out!!!
should i tell him i like him? or should i just keep it to my-self?
hell yeah!!!
I wanna train in New Mexico because of the high altitude at Greg Jacksons MMA or in Cali
But different lucky #'s. Not real sentences.
It's dripping with so much male privilege that it almost makes me nauseous. And I'm a man.
Sort of. I'm helping with NASA's social media efforts, but I'm still doing my job at , too.
Nah id wait til it come out on dvd. It freaked me out more than pranormal but story lost me!
Thanksgiving planning can be stressful, nice of you to include your dog too. What kind of sweater do you think you'll get?
i am loving the fact this is my first tweet thought i would dip my feet in the waters
I like your whisle you should send it via Bluetooth
are now playing live on at SXSW
Cohen: Derrida avoids cinema because a citational structure of the image is already monstrous, the mechanical reproduction culture of [+]
hahaha hi BILLY
yes! forgotten about AGAIN!
Thanks for being Dianely's fans!
I can screen print anything you need including oversized and all over. Just let me know your budget and I can work with you
The poet Se7en spit some real at the church this morning... Wish I woulda got it on video
I need to motivate myself to loose weight
sick as ballz
I am seriously contemplating getting that half-off Amz Prime membership now. I read a lot, and library K-offerings have long waiting lists..
watching kanye's #runaway. brilliant!
why dont you take a picture and post it on fn awesomeness dot com backslash we rule!
Thanks I'll see if my friends need any extras.
where are you hosting the next presentation?
Am I the only one who thinks TLR is somehow behind this?
Holycrap! Was selected to audition for in Austin. Nerves kicked in just selecting my time slot. Hope I can make it through!
Had a BLAST at last night's Buds Bash!! Thank you to all who came. The discussions were inspiring for a greener environment!
save me!
lol, are you thinking of going to pep?
Only a few rooms left this weekend!! Call now to reserve yours, ask about packages!! 2 adult 2 kids tickets !! 317-578-1200
Dick Clark is going on my dead list
O interesting. Glad someone's writing abt too. We've a lot to talk about at whatever conference we're both at next
This town has way to many bitches.
I'm reading and meditating a bit. I'm beginning to feel more serious about it but it's a long journey I have to take seriouslol
Haha!! Thanks man! I appreciate it.
: I love that I'm #firepants just because of that one time! Maybe I'll bring em back. Maybe.
looking for something in my tax book and LITERALLY opened up to the exact page. Strange
No matter how much of a learning process becomes mundane an monotonous.
Possible album ofthe year contenders... , horrible crowes , , or F**ked up. yours?
CAN I GET YOU TO FOLLOW MEE ?
Pls 4low me when u get a chance. U'll b happy u did due 2 a Feature Film Bidness Proposal 2 STAR
Whatever creativity is, it is in part a solution to a problem. - Brian Aldiss
Really want a cigarette right now but I refuse to do it! #badhabit #notworthit just going to try and sleep!
LOLOL. Three years of Italian finally came in handy 'cause I actually understood what tweeted. :D
RT : [Denver News] Denver man pleads guilty to kidnapping hikers near Nederland: BOULDER — A 44-year-old Denver man p......
Start your Monday off right with 1/2 off slices of Red Velvet Cake! Only $1.50! Hurry while it lasts!
wanted everyone to see my black stiletto's and be jel
Bummer, I wanted to hear more about the exhibit. Join us next time!
Black Friday Specials! Check out www.ruthlesscultureclothing.com FREE SHIPPING
Thank you for the follow. Maybe someone would be interested in creating something about in it's inaugural year?
I love my mom a lot & I'm thankful for her .
. Congrats, that's terrific!
Aaaaahhhhhhhhhhhh! giants won the super bowl!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
#Avengers Assemble!
You're a true, Inspiration. <3, Shine bright .(:
Hey everyone! Great to be on twitter!
I can't take all this studying anymore. 3 more fucken days!!
A lot of comments for support. Many concerns about traffic flow in area proposed for mosque in Brookfield .
I'll take 'pinched nerve' for 500, please, Alex.
It's so nice to run a report in which all the errors belong to other campuses, but not my own. If only I could keep my kitchen this clean.
Cool. Thanks for the info!
I swear if the packers got rid of Chad Clifton I will shit my pants. In te negative sense
Duly noted. Thanks.
#rejectedpromthemes Your Mom and Dad's Favorite Music
I just got back from Vaca to see that you sent me a DM about a lamp but now my DM is missing! Call me at the store - 412.630.8001
i love fannypak:-)
Happy Leap Day. Go ahead. Take the day off with pay. Tell the boss we said it was ok.
girlfriEND,boyfriEND,friEND. It All Has a END, but noy famILY<3
Going to the Aquarium!
S/O to the one and only for being my one and only... Love ya!!
Thanks Guy - Appreciate the kind words
i dont have school tomorrow its a holiday good friday
Off to work, wishing everyone a great day! BBL.
“: dont sweat the negative people in your life.. time to cut them out of your way...”
You overreacting little attention seeking whore. I think That goes for both of us?
Nothing rader than hearing personal info like former & about to be laid off employees info by your D-bag boss!
is waiting so jealous!
lol ohh do u think u need one cuz thats all that.matters
don't most nouns that pluralize by changing a vowel (goose, mouse, foot, etc) go back to proto-Germanic, or am I misremembering?
All week a $10 or more purchase, gets you a $10 off card from one of the indianapolis dining cards eateries! See you soon
oh god i screamed when i saw austin ! Your trying to kill me or something ?lol
Compress your speech without losing impact Tip 3: “Use a strongly visual story. “
settled on lowe's giftcard prequeled by an ecard for mother's day. it says, 'i love you, but i am also lazy, and you can't yell at me'
Maybe it's a hickey?
With all these great resources, is it too early to start a Christmas wish list?
my friend nd jenna went :)
Good luck :)
“: In other news, Nathan is hilarious hahah ”
Australia: basically America, but British.
Just learned that #Yourfavoritemartian songs are on iTunes.... Im going broke I swear
Back to working on a #genealogy brick wall that has stumped me for years. I'll tackle this guy's mystery yet!
Joshua is like my twin, my niggah
what you mean honey?something bad happened to you
Money team, yo!
I'm feeling really good since I've been going. The trainer is kicking my as!!!
Me &&* Brother makin french fries (; they are pretty BOMB if i must say ..
My vote goes to the candidate who can improve the Gross National Happiness.
RT WOW Laury.!.. #NASCAR will never be the same! A Checkered Flag Event-Your Vegas Dining Book & Racing! A Winning Combo!! :)
'This user does not exist' :/
Felicia will be available at the TN SHOW to CLINIC/COACH so get with her if you need assistance.
could learn a lot about advocacy from
hey sorry fell asleep just now,feel really bad now :( just wanted to wish you all the best for exam,goodluck :) xx
I love the taste of your blood baby...♥
I could have got ya. Working from Waukesha tmrw. What's your shift?
Is that the one who got married? Is he happy so far?
totally posterized that guy. what a dunk.
Are we not formed, as notes of music are, For one another, though dissimilar? ~Percy Bysshe Shelley
My #puppy sucks on my blanket. Too cute
When you give advice, and others don't listen and turns out you were right.
Learning priceless stories. How "lickity brindle up the middle" originated! His thoughts on the "dirtiest" player he ever saw.
I want a warm, scrumptious delectable 100% angus beef burger rite about now
Following certain people on twitter makes me even more confused than my own tweets.
I know weather can be serious, but the CBS Cincinnati weather holding a filibuster...
:) Thanks for the RT!
all good though. Thanks for checking sis
Hotel engineering dispatched to fix the lack of power on the strips in the front of IB Center at
Change the game forever.
I will be unavailable and unreachable at 8pm tonight
Damn I'm in the mood for some Tasty Taxi.
Greg Notess: "librarians are a little different than other people."
Just landed at La Guardia airport in NY
Reliving the donut stick ordeal of 1995 to roommate, as yet unresolved.
ALERT: RT : : USC students think listeria outbreak in cantaloupe may be just another outbreak like E.Coli
you hipster
#PawneeRangers episode of #Parks&Recreation is now 1 of my fav! #mradamscott dressed as Batman crying. Doesn't get better than that.Awesome!
Hi Libchat, I'm Monique, a tech specialist at an academic library.
Once again, it became known that the doping test failed Ar-Truf, according to some rumors, he was smoking grass
If u grew up on Raman Noodles retweet!!!
Guess i'll stay in and watch Hatchet!
wake up
I think the only thing you have to worry about and real question is: do your cats understand that?
Great to see the sun. Feels like the first day of an arab spring!
lucky bastard
Thanks for the follow Loraine "CHECKOUT" Meech Dogg's JUICED UP on youtube. Please "HELP" us gain more fans tell some friends...
BAD CREDIT,SLOW CREDIT,NO CREDIT OR BANKRUPTCY,WHATEVER YOUR CREDIT SITUATION IS,WE HAVE APPROVE EVERYONE,
Oh for heaven's sake! The Word Press spell checker changed constructivist to constructionist!!!
Keith Haring exhibit at the Brooklyn museum was good. Chicken and waffles after the museum was even better
ah, thanks for letting me know. still wise words though!
what's your secret?
When you've hit the wall, that last 15 min at work can feel like an eternity. I've had 15 min to go for the last 2 hrs.
it hurts to be perfect?
My uncle used to tap us on the head as kids and say, " And a Boing for you!" We loved it.
Haha! Those things are smarter than we realize :)
Let go of the Old things so God can send you the New!
was great to see u, thanks for coming !
I know they're all jerks.... and you don't know who he is?!;O
I've decided to comment on the article (compromise?). Maybe I'll tweet my findings.
I never said the game was going to be close, just that Ok St. will get in over Bama
this is a sickening joke that you play with my emotions, so i pray you burn in hell & never find the ocean .
The Akward moment when you though you see at the zoo but it wasn't him it was a look alike I had to take another look :)
Ghost writers in the sky.
I still hate wearing these retainers. 😒
True story: I was at a small zoo out here today and told another mom the same thing.
Our waffles are made with love and care and beauty, plus normal foodstuffs.
I've never pretended to have discerning taste in music...Exhibit A: my itunes library. So Selena may be the gal for me!
Goodnight Planet Earth
More events on The Trail: Food and Wine Pairings at 3 Fox Vineyards; Wine Camp at Veramar Vineyard; Music by Ken Wenzel at Lost Creek Winery
hahaha that was hilarious
It's truly hard to believe that Justin is turning 18 in just less then 2 hours I'm just like wow omg he just grew up so fast like the rest
Just making sure that you received the case studies I sent you, were they what you were looking for?
Bump & grind
"What happens in Vegas..."
nope cause Robert looks like old sucker.
MY FAV WAS JASON AND SAMS WEDDING AWESOME
I'll sleep when I'm dead!!... and when I'm tired, because I want to have enough energy to enjoy life here on earth!
If I could get a S/O from that would make my daayy :))
ps that's me in the Crawford jersey
RT Pasadena Playhouse's new season: 'Sleepless in Seattle'
This is why I never look back at old tweets on my personal account. RT : just realized how boring I am. I'm old and boring.
yes, it's pretty spot on! because, who actually leaves danny's w/o making out with someone?
How about you?
this is always true... and true to all circumstances.. the "self" is always our best foe....
haha i call everyone tht. and same here lol. my mom is big on bollywood!
I just want to be happy.
Congratulations to the students that are #graduating today!
I hate it when that happens!!!
Alright, its time to pull Nova now...
Follow back?
Heading to Chiyu Sushi tonight in Mt Washington-hopin the downtown traffic/83s is worth it!
My cat turns 18 next month, meaning....now, she has to register to vote. And for selective service.
totally agree! RT : I think many of us have had ineffective exp w grammar as students
Ugh, I woke up late.
Okay, is there something you'd like me to actually do...or should I just continue to sign up for things?
Yeah, but this isn't a good thing. RT : Each of the last 12 and 18 of the last 22 runs by the #Mariners have come via the home run.
Since both of my teams are out early, (AS USUAL), I'm rooting for my favorite player Kobe Bean to get his 6th this year
accessibility to opportunity for all must be available to all if we plan on sustaining ourselves into a healthy future of prosperity
Legendary house DJ will be tonight. Care to join?
The sign is in the yard. Let's sell this house!
RT : Love is holy because it is like grace—the worthiness of its object never matters. -Marilynne Robinson, Gilead.
Morning all!! From all of us here on the iCBallers staff, we hope you have a day full of unexpected greatness & positive opportunities!
No shoes, no shirt; and i still get service.<3
Hello Drew Brees! Another proud Purdue graduate! Nice work!!
Mike Brown is a defensive-minded coach whose team has shitty defense, and an "always prepared" coach whose team is never prepared.
I think I still have to start a fire while being interviewed by to get that badge.
#RocRoyal you can bring yo friends and i can bring my friends let the party begin, begin
Happy easter
silverlake farmers market now till 2!!
I didn't realize the fresh prince played for Wisconsin...
Not his second AB...
Mya Hatchette lawyer from Winderweedle, Haines, Ward & Woodman, PA in Orlando deliberately filed my case in a far away wrong Court 2abuse me
NATHALIE ROMAN. If you are reading this, let me know. You changed your username.
will be releasing updates to the Bonamour pre-launch web site today, stay tuned.....
Coming up soon! NS Live with Richard Reed Parry (of ), , on Wed. 2/8, 7:30PM at
why are you always sick tabby! Did I stay home from work??
for my art, I know what you mean. I know you'll make it big :)
"Let us boldly approach the throne of our gracious God, where we may receive mercy and his grace to find timely help." Heb. 4:16
thanks Frank u da man!
A thing or two amiss wouldn't let the party stop, but your failed glance puts it out completely
Surly Abrasive is available online and in-store...
whats good wit it boy follow the shop back
thank for the retweets, have an awesome Sunday~
is the man!!
Happy Mama's day to all the lovely selfless caring dedicated moms out there!!
Students: Goal for 2morrow is get gradebook completely updated. Look for (hopefully positive) changes to your grade by 2morrow PM.
Justin: she's beautiful Ryan: she has pretty eyes Chaz: and a nice smile Kenny: she's sweet. Justin: and she's reading this now." ♥
I second that. His head is messed
": BEST PICK UP LINE: Hey, does this rag smell like chloroform to you?"
The inhabitants of this northern clime are distinguished from those that dwell in southern lands by having a national dress (1850)
I'm more excited about "Rock of Ages" than any other movie this summer. Yeah, I'm that girl.
Samsung Galaxy S I possibly revealed in leaked images
Thats awesome. Where are you at?
Happy Easter everyone!
Beautifully written
Haha yeaa a lunch is early
no, cause theres no one in the house lol no reason to lol
Got that supersoaker. Pussy pop like cola coka. Plus its tighter than a choker. Got you smiling like the Joker ;)
Thank goodness both Seders are over. Didn't overdo it on the matzo, but I also don't want to see food again for about a month!
Good luck
Great men are rarely isolated mountain peaks; they are the summits of ranges
Looks aren't everything
Go U.S. women soccer team!!! Beat Japan on Sunday!
Its Wednesday :)! That means I have late start and early release at school today! But I'm stating to finish a test. But I'm gonee :)!
I love Rubicon! I missed the past two episodes. Plan on watching them on-demand this week :)
Cheese, cheese, cheese, tomatoes, cheese, basil, garlic, thyme, cheese, sour dough, rye, pickles, pretzels, crackers & cheese. & wine.
I've seen that cartoon once and really liked it. What, when, where is the feast?
U go through those times when u feel like ur done with life.... Then.... Someone comes along and shows you that they are what was missing
Thanks for checking. It would be awesome if you guys had an old set of equipment.
Boozy-mocha-a-go! Thanks for stopping in!
Eating the last of my NYC bagels...
Debating selling a ton of my size Medium shirts..
What flavor did U get? I want. RT : I always think of whenever I get Tasti :)
I was wrong - Pocket did save the bookmark, but it says I should retry.
Gaby charged in hard. He was over the ball when Buck was still making his way to it. He had the play and hesitated.
& on top of it i have to babysit
Khan himself is even starting his own school to address some the admitted limitations of his videos.
Dr. Bill Sysak () will be speaking at Beer-Con. Register and listen!
I guess we agree to disagree... If you follow regularly on the #backchannel you will find upbeat news, events and conversation!
Just ate a shit load of fried chicken
On a scale from 1-10, you're a 9 and I'm the 1 you need..
(I bought the first one - and absolutely love it - but that's not quite enough to fill an hour long interview...)
Guess what happens when you have a vivid dream that you're taking a piss.
let's get a crew to go chill in Sam's car hahah
No that wasn't. I couldn't make it back on to post it. So two today!
After 5 days, I've almost recovered from doing pull-ups. Time to do pull-ups again!
Eighty percent of success is showing up. - Woody Allen
I should probs tweet more
is fighting over the electric stapler.
Inspiration can come from the most unlikely of places
oh my gosh! I have been to that French tree chapel... years ago! Good memories. Thanks for the reminder!
Love Google's #StPatricksDay logo - pretty sure they know I am looking at it from PST where its still March 16th though :-)??
we might have new speakers in our neighborhood now "we upgrading?"
Precious in my pants!
Looks at alls my followerss.. thanks y'all
keep calm and carry on. Dawn victor in full effect now!!!
Thanks Ray. Have a good weekend. :)
#Green, A Hard Day's Knight. John Taylor of the Nightside becomes Walker, finds Excalibur, meets King Arthur. & Mab, Oberon & Titania, oh my
hope u had a good xmas, sit up!
Weird, people who listen to you, only to escape from the the shitty main stream news, don't want to hear that stuff? WTF!?
The best part about me having all these weird dreams and shit is that they normally translate into something more. Something bigger.
okey dokey talk soon I know you r patient
"Each day, you must rise with a restless enthusiasm. If you don’t, you are working."
There is never enough time to do everything grrr
Glad you like our names!! RT : And their storage system is called Corral...
Its Nice Outside;)
We should just # & @ mention the shit out of each other for one day, just to see if we'd start to trend. That would show em!
Hey, thanks for the mention! We're flattered! Let us know if you have any questions, we'd love to help! :)
Can I be Frank with you? No? I wanna name change so I can go incognito. ~ Lisa Morgan
no lie-ee-i-ee-i
I hate when mom ask stupid questions and when I give a stupid answer she gets pissed
Thank you $10k donation this morning! Now at $24k... $6k to 30% hurdle!
Really enjoyed the AMT crusader tonight! Stay blessed and be safe everyone. Calling it a night...LOVE YOU ALL!!!
just in case I forget, happy 30th buddy, welcome to the old man club. :)
it's a community of dope musicians/artists basically. A way to share ideas and progress together.
Fact of the day: You don't have to go to church on Ash Wednesday, its not a Holy Day of Obligation
Wow surprisingly my mother didn't yell at me...let's hope edlines not bad tonight 🙏
u the man! After all these years still doing ur thing!
Urgh, spam Dms need to leave.
“Victory is sweetest when you've known defeat.”
Haha , I'm pretty for real so don't ask me ; for real ? - nah dude , for fake -.- Dumb
Try tonight's special: The Mario-Gherita Pizza! Fresh mozzarella, vine ripened tomatoes, garden picked basil & house tomato sauce. Only $5!
I really need to find the on/off switch for my mind cause this not being able to fall asleep stuff is becoming an epidemic.
Study: Less Smog In Baltimore-Washington Area But Other Types Of Pollution Are High
#LasVegas area residents should #text GAVISH to 90210 for #RealEstate info from Gavish Real Estate. Do you want a similar program?
So um I planned a trip to Canada & I'm going with paola :') gr8 <3
A Reminder that Hayao Miyazaki Isn't the Only Director at Studio Ghibli: In the United States the studio is best known for the films ...
Trying not to panic - I can't find my Aussie power adaptor and I need it for my hair straightener... crap
Never thought i would look forward to a game between the Heat and the Clippers
Want to know if you guys received my direct message as requested for the TM prize win? When will we here from Sony? Thanks again.
Though you are disappointed is hope; never let hope fail you! Though one door is shut, there are thousands still open to you.
Need a neww bio!! I need help!
Definitely do it. I'm going to see if I can pull off getting to the show in one of the cities, but I'm not sure yet.
The best man is he who most tries to perfect himself, and the happiest man is he who most feels that he is perfecting himself.
Good luck to everyone doing their SP today!!!
That'll work. He hasn't lived till he tries parking on Farwell Ave. though.
LeBron & D-Wade are really going to have to get Mario Chalmers involved in the 2nd half if Kansas is going to come back in this one.
Who is excited for the new Greene Turtle?? We can't wait to open up and party hard! Can I get a RT?
Do you PIN on Pinterest? We do!!! Search GAP State Street to follow our pins... we would love to follow yours as well!
ESPN Pre-Draft party tomorrow night??
New addition to the terrible rapper bio files:.... "Bio: I'm just trying to be you're favorite rapper."
great to hear from you!
And when you're gone, living you own life, making new memories and meeting new people, I hope you remember me.
If I worked on a restaurant on Valentines Day, I would put a fake engagement ring in every girl's drink.
thanks for the great show at the Reading Comedy Outlet. We love you!
terrell suggs' injury will definitely force roger goodell to consider what the NFL does to prepare players for offseason pickup basketball
Join Las hermanas TONIGHT: Health & Minority Youth at 6:30PM in Marvin Center 402!!!
Really? Did you erase last year from your memory?
Too tired.
Love is a temporary madness.
Winner winner chicken dinner!
Peter Crouch already sent off! Sorry Tottenham, this isn't going to end well.
BTW, that is us-19W towards Johnson City. It turns into i-181 after JC and will run into I-81. N on Hwy 19
Never a hater always a motivator
Tony Parker pushes off a lot
At this meeting atlanta tryna pitch for radio play
Girls like we do nice stuff to them, sweet and shit. We'll guess what guys like that there girls do also .
Looking at freshman pictures. God, I was so wonderfully awkward.
I just followed today so permit me to say Happy Belated Birthday!
RT : ..focus is education, distance learning or career development, follow HIMSS' She's tweeting live at
Congrats! May your experience by as awesome as mine was!! Have fun!
im muscular.... there jus small becuz im skinny -__-
glad you like the new Shack!
If you're a bird, I'm a bird.
Sorry, Laura. Hope you can find something else fun to entertain your guests.
The cherry tomatoes in my salad (From QFC) are less than fresh. But I already put dressing on so I'm past the point of return. Wish me luck.
sweet got next Wednesday off work! To the Davis Arena for a great night!
Do you suppose the fact that people perceive that Romney stands for nothing except lower taxes on the super rich will hurt him in the GE?
yes n there soo sexy right??
Welcome Scott! What brings you to San Francisco?
Yea! Great to hear, thanks for coming out! RT : Fun 80s party last night - will be back! :-)
When your cousins jocks your shit!
I better see in the Cannon caucus room at some point today
Any plans to offer night or weekend classes?
#bro I stay hye
I don't hate you but I just wanna save you while there's something left to save, whoa whoa
thought you'd like that ;)
are you going to respond?
Salute to the following: for staying this the game PLUR
Grave Goods - Ariana Franklin
Autopia at night is the best.. Even though I cant drive and the cars keep dying :P
Wish I could read Paul ryan's mind while he listens to obama's #SOTU talk
You always make me feel relieved. It's a gift, you have.
I stayed at a really nice, really fancy hotel this weekend. The towels were so thick I could hardly get my suitcase shut.
hi, how are you doing Eliza? ⚽
Hi Mandy, Thanks very much for the follow, cheers Stuart
Stoked for #Alcatraz tonight! Such a great show!
just read your take on the movie. Come take a look at what I'm working on at www.iNeverSayNever.com
Come catch us tomorrow in TOLEDO, OH at @ Headliners. We play the main stage at 12pm. Don't miss it!
Great day to be a Kentucky Fan!!!
#TOP25CartoonSeriesOfAllTime He-Man :-) :-) :-)
Sadly I don't have the gym all to myself as I thought I would
Do you have skin care questions you have always wanted to ask an expert dermatologist? Shoot 'em at me!
Twitter is just always fun .
fuck u im doin jus fine without u now u c u made a big mistake so save it im moving on
Thanks, I'll take a look at it.
Driving and shop Tmr!.
true self.
Did a story on a cat today that made it's way to Madison from Webster, Minnesota under the hood of a car! Amazingly it wasn't hurt.
I'm gonna get yelled at for being so lazy, oh well
Beautiful day in minneapolis
One day I hope you look back at what we had, and regret every single thing you did to let it end.
That's putting it mildly. I couldn't believe he was a contender. Political memory is short.
the day he follows me, i'm going to make a cake like that:P
we are BEYOND in love :)
You Are One Of Kind Girl 4-3-12:)
Trayvon Martin Limited Edition Skittles bag o.0
GM twitter world C
"TIME IS A TERRIBLE THING TO WASTE" Aspiring models 4 work send us an email for further info
attending a Lions meeting on Wed. evening. Plan on promoting Bauble. It's a perfect fit!
ill be there at 7:30. You ll get to meet my husband and parents.
but they are playing the Devils now? I feel like their time to celebrate a quarterfinal victory against us is far than over.
Or MySpace?
Good Morning #Hou. What a nice way to wake up.
The rumbling is upon us in Center Line/Warren.
nun how you been?
Hunger Games >>> everything EXCEPT
I'm nuts about handbags!
He is trying to rename me..and it's not working!!
You should only be able to "tweet" from experience!!
You're most welcome !
There are too many words to express how I'm feeling right now. Drawing it out.
m, sounds like we'll have to add it to the list of yummy things to make when I visit... next to fried rice :)
Taylor Swift is getting on my nerves!
You just got #YOLO ed
FA cup started and I'm not sure who I would like to win. Both teams have players that have issues with people that are not white.
LMFAO how awkward, my bffl tweeted that.
Me: So, did you play a lot of WoW in high school? Him: Hell no. I got laid a lot in high school.
Contrary to the opinion of many people, leaders are not born. Leaders are made, and they are made by effort and hard work. Vince Lombardi
Me and my bro are getting distant from each other. He doesn't know it tho.
halloween plans ppl?
having a numb mouth >>>>
38% of people comparison shop online.
do you believe in taxation without representation? Mmj?
Shit got real 😳
Still not sure whether I should keep this gray hair and look old or pluck it and look bald.
The grass is always greener on the other side, but it still needs to be mowed.
Thanks for the follow Frida...going to have any gluten-free offerings?
I'd expect more after 30+ month relationship than grabbing $40 bucks, slapping me in the face & suggesting I keep paying you
Great quote from Matt Dernoga: "The only jobs plastic bags are generating in our county are government jobs picking them up"
#baddjnames dj scratch n sniff
I'm doing well. Keeping busy. Where are you these days?
It's been a long dayy,
Thanks. I will track it down using my 'research skills' (i.e. will google it).
That's what I was thinking too! thanks :-)
my father-in-law just killed a black widow spider where I was sitting just an hour earlier.
HahahaRT : I'm in the studio holding a new born baby as I do my drops for The #HotInCleveland Mixtape and we're both HOLLIN!!!!
Hearing my sister yell "I am an adult!" to her child leads me to believe otherwise..
Good Morning! Next holiday is New Years and our Anniversary! We were married on the stroke of Midnight on the Millennium on Capital steps!
I'll have to read that one. What was your take on it?
"Love stinks yeah yeah"
What is it to be In LOVE with the one? Is there really a "one"???
Updated Logo and Cover Photo I will be use that for my videos from now on -ProtoSkar
Wearing a fake mustache in class tonight...classy, professional, and absolutely academic. FUN
oh, aqualung
Umm, a lot of people say I'm weird. So everytime I'm around those people I'll talk about blood/death things to freak them out
: #Romney can't wait to be able to use the #Bully Pulpit.
In my sleep deprivation, I bought Christmas presents. This will not end well. I stopped before I used bill money though! :D
The thing that sucks about my girlfriend's period is that it's my fault if she has one and it's probably my fault if she doesn't.
true story! Amateurs.... :)
no sorry, it's a ticketed event and all 200 tix sold out in 2 days! U can try 2 get 1 at the door if anyone cancels.
oh sunday nights, if only monday mornings didn't follow you..
my Bionic keeps losing signal.have to toggle airplane mode and back few times to get back to 3G or 4G. 2nd bionic doing this.
Unfortunately, you are correct. We do have inexpensive six packs though! What are you looking for?
Closer than close! RT : 138 hours to graduation.
Here we go Brewers here we go! WTB Rickey Weeks
re: Rebranding-What are audience #s? My daughter is in college.She & her friends don't watch docs.They read non-fiction books.
"My achilles heel is love"
Happy Saturday Everyone!!! hope you are all doing something fun?!
": This is why #Scorpios are associated with the phoenix rising, nothing ever really gets them down"
chillin! I can't sleep ! :'c
Top 5 sack leaders over the last 2 seasons. 1 current Chief. 2 Former
Who is your favorite 50's music group?
Playing in the shop right now - Stray Cats: Built For Speed, on vinyl.
You look adorable!
I feel like i'm #losing today.
a walk to remember!! That movie is raw!
I guess the Giants like playing from behind
hngjdhs i know but like why is he still in the spotlight?? i thought he faded away like 2 years ago lmao
RT : "Thank god saint Patrick's day is over #toodrunk #needtosleep"
I don't know where you're going and I don't know why, but listen to your heart before you tell him goodbye!
We are so glad you enjoy the service. Happy eReading!
that makes no sense at all! What a holes! I hope he is ok!
Great day of filming,footage looks great...pics..great! Follow us on fb for everything. Last Breath: A Shay Lucas Film for more ...
“: Hustle+ Mustle = Success! I like that math...” yes sir....Fab
get 2 large please! Pepperoni
Looks like will lose his bet w/ , unless #Hawks COMPLETELY fall apart in 4th.
What's up Poo??
what is this all about?
All the Argento continues. OPERA, tonight, in 35
#dropbox wiki thanks - on ubuntu, tomboy notes are nice: can edit and synch w/one.ubuntu.com - says works on mac /win
thanks for the follow. Always learn so much from you!
any chance y'all will add more 6:30 a.m. #BootcampBarre classes throughout the week? Lurb!
This time Natalie tweeted tinged with romance
nba economics class “: Jus got my first check...finally understand TAXES...smdh...time for work”
what's next weekend?
Thanks!! Much appreciated
The neighbors across my studio are painting a room Crayola 8-pack Green. I kinda love it for the garishness.
whatup with that alcohol
Be your own Prince Charming. Rescue yourself from the castle.
STILL PEEING
(AP) -- Romney wins Rhode Island GOP presidential primary.
Is the sky blue, is the Pope catholic, etc.? RT Come on Tweetdeck. Don't fail me NOW!
Inchworms found on my person yesterday: 3. I ran through about 5 gauntlets of them.
It's funny how most music today is about how much the guy wants to hook up with you, when all the Beatles wanted to do was hold your hand.
Breakfast of champions.... Leggo
Wound up spending the day with my uncle from Virginia and my grandma, back from Arizona. Life is good.
I can't wait for tomorrow because it holds every dream that I have ever had...
I'm Sorry I got you upset. I love you
This was amazing!!!!
Yo wanna go to the draft tomorrow night w me and the boys? I have an extra ticket
We are hearing you...
I need a cigarette
Thanks for the RT Jeff!
Yes. It's on Facebook.
Great! See you there! RT : Great NYC Weekend: and NYTimes Travel Show. Looking forward to both!
stinks to be you!
yr blog posts are my illicit bedtime-w-the-iPhone stories. Tremendously enjoy yr writing. Any Belleville/menilmt food recs?
Here comes trouble: mom just showed up with huge honkin pack of oreo cookies.
#nyy #yankees No teams puts a more pronounced shift on TEX than Tampa (Madden actually was the first). If the situation calls for it..(cont)
Making arrangements to host the next East Midlands Young Planners event, the week commencing the 6th November (further details to follow)
I lovee when youtube famous people think they are famous...
I think so - Sunday night and Monday probably...may need to be a +1 :)
All Hail Ales Nos. 15 (bier de garde) and 16 (schwartzbier) bubbling along quite nicely. All they need now is winter weather to lager in.
Loving my new iPad. Think I'm officially (finally) becoming a Mac person
@ school. teacher's like bitching at all of us -_-
So awesome... thought I was was the only one who got those calls!
"Every generation laughs at the old fashions, but follows religiously the new."—Henry David Thoreau
challenge ACCEPT-TE--------Z.
Plz plz follow plz!!!!!!! She is awesome and she follows back!
was #winestorming last night, then got sad when I stormed too much and ran out of wine!
4 Kenyans, including presidential candidate, Uhuru Kenyatta, to stand trial at the Haque for 07 post election violence. via NYTimes
Thank you Vivian!
Hamilton. again.
Thanks. It's definitely a bummer.
Yeah, I would probably be filing for an exemption rather than FULL HUMAN RESEARCH REVIEW.
China Cracks Down After Chen Escape - Wall Street Journal
sadly we don't live in that world
RT - I wonder who came up with #ReplaceAMovieTitleWithPenis ? LOL. - No kidding huh? #TooFunny!
Tonight is the night for season finales, and so far so good.
Thanks for joining us on air this morning, !
im boreeeeddd D:
The Rufus Wainright video stars Helena Bonham Carter as a Librarian!
Under draft strategic plan for #uwgb Weidner Center, mission would be "To delight, educate and inspire"
Love your site idea and a user of it myself. What is your skype or email conact info?
there's no excuse for bad oral hygene.
um I didn't say anything about "fat" fingers...
I won a great bracelet at tonight!
if you weren't #totallyawesome, I wouldn't have said so..,
Dinner date with my sister :]
I love you , you rock
I want some good seafood
I got us lights for
oh i got ya, you aint tryna give me mandi's ticket though lmao
Got AC in the yo #blessing thank you Jesus...
If you want to stand out, don't be different, be outstanding. Meredith West
thank you love your tweets XO
NO I AM NOT TWEETING MYSELF JESSICA IS ON THAT ACCOUNT
RT just for the heck of it . (;
headed to #usnatarchives right now. awesomeness expected.
truly appreciate the support:)
i know i know!! everybody has been telling me, its nice to have people supporting me!
Law enforcement sources tell us it was a small amount of coke and Ecstasy for personal use
Reminiscing on the Nintendo, gameboy & Sega days
If u arent #following my radio show or my company u still can!
OMG I'm gonna do it like right NOW!!!!
Get special! This wknd's special is the RAMON OMELET! A mix of Chorizo, black bean, cheddar with fire roasted salsa on top! Have one. Now!
Who the hell knows what the Hornets ever did to him. Hmm, maybe a dislike of Shinn. But no excuse.
HEY. ~Dana
“: piss the futon bro” #tommyswag I figured as much. I was pretty wet, rolled around outside tho too haha
Idk wtf my neighbors are doing but they need to stop making all that noise
FITzees, you're gonna LOVE our new #PizzaPasta! It's whole wheat penne w/ turkey sauce, chicken sausage, mozzarella, spices, and basil!
The show "It's Worth What?" would be interesting if it was hosted by a robot that very simply introduced items, rather than Cedric the Moron
#TeamTim! cc: RT : What a moment! Welcome to twitter !
I know your somewhere out there...somewhere far away. #teamjammer is here to stay. We ain't going away!
#FF :) shes amazing and a inspiration to us <3
he's a gem! won't stay in England and should go to a team where he can play regularly, the goals will keep flowing..
RI holiday lighting contest announced - Quad City Times RI holiday lighting contest announced Quad City Times The Rock Island Beautificat
you remember when your interactions were showing you when people followed you in July? Yeah. I'm having the same problem.
I JUST #RETWEETED LIKE 50+ OF TWEETS WHY BECAUSE THEIR JUST THAT GOOD NOW U GO SEE FOR YOURSELF AND FOLLOW! HE'LL GET U FOLLOWERS!
Omaha, ne. Next stop Denver.
I know I can be a jerk sometimes, and yeah I can be mean a lot, but you know I tried many times to apologize to you for it.
“: When you meet someone special...you'll know.Your heart will beat more rapidly and you'll smile for no reason.
What a gorgeous day!
Interesting narrative in #Frontline's Part 3: that POTUS got swayed by Geithner 2 B soft on banks; ltr by Rahm 2 toughen up on them.
why aren't there more meeting like this???
"A man may fail many times but he isn't a failure until he begins to blame somebody else." - J. Paul Getty
cranberry juice :D
Why wont i fall asleeeeppp
was just messing around like saying he realized he stunk last year
I dnt follow bck people that dnt mention me , so if u wanna follow bck u better mention me
Getting a tweet from would make my night!MIOBI taught me to shoot for my dreams!ily guys💗
finally? Only took me like..uhh..every 3 months ;)
great tweet
and Julia <3 u too!
im not a beef kinda guy. turkey's my thing
RT : The Truth won't change just because you get offended easily.
RT : RT : You're whispering and looking at me. I know you're talking about me, Dumbass.
you literally said "pretty major"
Did you see the 'White Teeth' miniseries? Loved both books and wondering the same thing about adapting her...
I love you so much
Watching the new stone cold Steve Austin DVD. I think it's funny now he understands Eric Bischoff move
I think I will be going to the beach tomorrow :-)
get ready to see me in the neon safety vest at noon, folks
Yoga room, sushi, pinkberry, peet's coffee. Where am I?
Dusted off my bash/expect script knowledge this evening and saved myself an hour of clicking & cut-pasting. Not too shabby.
Out of work :D
I wuda been SOL if my ball wuda fell off somewhere else
Stopped at Denny's to eat hoping I didn't have to wait 45 minutes for my food.
When you know better, you do better.
Hola tweeps! We'll be closed this Monday for the holiday. Enjoy.
says, "the audience shapes the brand."
#bigtennetwork hey. I'm trying to watch a football game. Stop going to commercial during drives.
Two Beagles Bakery would like to thank all our great customers & supporters by offering free cookies tomorrow today. We'll also be...
": “: ": “: love #oomf who texts me goodnight every night”oh me!" oh yeah!”so me?" obv
why? Everyone else is putting shit up..
I love watching Irvin fight! Not a lot to watch when you knock someone out in 8 seconds though.
Justin Timberlake I have always supported measures and principles and not men
for appetizers they have lobster crab oysters tuna shrimp everything but there's break meatballs and now were getting dinner
Inspired by all of the amazing people I met at my first conference
can't even imagine!
love --great insights
thanks for the RT Osonoi-San!
If they can cure Magic Johnson's HIV they sure as fuck should be able to fix Mikey J's parkinsons.
When I write cursive it looks g af.
best PG in the league
Just finished another round of Headshots for Haiti. Raised another $207 today, bringing the grand total raised to $2200
Vincent IT won SEO project in travel domain. A word press site to be optimized for their customers in U.S.
Ouch, Jason that hurts. You promised to help me. Remember cuz I asked first?
look for me on sunday night! ill be the one with a, "Matty Ice=Mr.Softee" sign
Miami Dolphins undrafted rookie free agents sign deals
Finally saw 21 Jumpstreet it was hilarious!
you watch Smash too??
Well your words before were prophetic ... now they are down by 3.
Winter where are you?
Remember when they asked why he changed his name to Meta Worldpeace and he said "just because" hahaha, this fool
i completely understand! I am traveling for work next week for a week. Totally booked!
at a stoplight lol
I just re-read this in context - I was attempting to poorly correlate man-card to clinic bombing... it was all around fail :)
Me, too.
Sadly, Yes. We talked black men women relationships on July 4th. RT : is that the brother behind ActNow Foundation?
This Dm -___- I'm playing hard to get to everyone :-)
At guard, number one, his favorite movie is the notebook...
all in good fun. not like any of us would actually DO it
how are you?
#Orlando. BIG FIESTA planned for November 1. Bring your friends, bring family! 30 years in the business!
...but New Star later with ?!
RT : So these Girl Scout cookies might as well say "Serving size: one box."
Good Morning! Have a great day too! : )
So now I'm obsessed with sequins. Thanks and friends.
My RING was im his dick SMFH!!!!!!
Welcome to from the Twitterverse! Emp #66828 present and accounted for. Have a great Tuesday!
For some reason kids always like dancing in underwear. Maybe we would all dance better in just underwear.
And I still had to miss out on so many other great events. Why is everything on the same day?!?!
+1 RT : Me. RT Any takers for The Avengers being the biggest box office performer of the year?
If you dont dream big, theres no use of dreaming. If you dont have faith, theres nothing worth believing.
COME GET YOUR PICTURE TAKEN AT OUR DOWNTOWN LOCATION!
RD - Keeps $ local w gr8r ctrl than Sacto; Your premise suggests non RDA projects do not cost to operate?
yeah...not many good options. Brathaus and Catch22 have one I think. Don't take Trinity's - they're assholes.
How large of a mirror are you looking for?
my friend just texted me saying "HELP!! IM NEXT TO DIRECTIONATORS!" . hahah (;
Before the madness begins tomorrow I want to thank you for all the amazing recruiting coverage you provide us. GO NOLES!!
good seeing you tonight bro... Goodtimes... Oh and thanks for the track....
Going to orange leaf with Kevin cuz i have no life with teenagers.
Anyone want a tattoo?? My cousin Faron is a pro:o)
Funny you tweet this, we're creating some right now! RT : There's a monthly rebus in magazine.
One of the best conversations I've ever had was with Melinda Emerson, the SmallBizLady; we talked for an hour and 1/2! I'm in LA-She's in P…
i got you bro!
God of War 2 it is.
I don't know how they will be able to adjust this season if he doesn't....
they say that love is forever, your forever is all that I need . ❤ - ❤
text me
I heard they didn't want to hire the hobbit to replace all the divits....
What's up with people buying up all the #missonifortarget and then selling it on EBAY? Humans can be quite bothersome.
HaHa! Loving! it, no doubt that would be a great idea. Rain jackets too maybe? :)
Seem as i always get sick around this time of the year.
Happy Easter miss Piper :)! wish U and your family a wonderful weekend :)!
Nearly blew the sub in my car proofing this mix. Whoa.
these boxes are the smell of the art of print alive and well!
There are no pierogis in Bulgaria.
I didn't have a camera. (not ) had a camera, but has been "on biz" since we got back. Thanks for reminder tho
perfect. Can you buy 5 extra for me? I will reimburse you and split the profits if we win.
Fuck it. I'll just bust out the paper bag.
There's that. We all knew the D would suck, but the O was supposed to be the bailout.
I should be getting ready and not just lying here lazily.
RT Who has the best BLT in Sacramento? I'm in need. And full disclosure, I don't like thin, limp bacon.
You too. Still despise the Knicks.
Sorry. Tis better to do laundry for yourself than for others. Still loves ya though;-)
Was it really simpler in 1935? Think of the societal divisions and distrust of socialist benefits. Roosevelt. Hitler. Simpler?
had a great time at Vanessie Saturday. We'll be back in Santa Fe real soon. Have a great week, friends!
JK Rowling announces new book; Harry Potter fans react - Washington Post
These guys seem right up our alley:
the US just doesnt care enough about soccer
no. we can't. Admin refused to add a Delta V requisition to my contract for next year.
It is not cool to take your girlfriend's shoe off and give her a full-on foot massage...on the crowded train.
we play two back to back!! only like, 5-8 bones, we'd love to see you :)
this is just pathetic; 1st base ump calls Burriss safe n BLATANT makeup call; Manny was out there; who says ragging on blue doesn't pay off?
RT : We're giving away an iPad2 at 5,000 follower! Everyone who tweets is entered to win!
Welcome new followers
Mexican for dinner then off to zoo lights with some good friends!! And I guess well take the kids to... I love Christmas!!
I have been invited to the Jefferson Awards Gala in Chicago! So excited! What an honor..can't wait!
No I'm in the radio play-by-play booth I have nice 35" HDTV right in front of me.
yeah ! Haha its embarrassing(x
Would love to check out , but it's definitely not
Lodi and blue cheese potatoes
Thanks so much! I can't wait.
You got it Mr. Franco!
what up
Ready for brewers baseball watching on #brewers gamecast. Go crew
AZ GOP State Chairman Tom Morrissey not providing vote count - Ron Paul Supporters demand Roberts Rules - event 4 hrs behind
Before he was one of the most powerful men in the world, John D. Rockefeller was a Chancellor Alumni. Who will you become? goo.gl/Iwcpj
If only Harvey were on Twitter. Safe trip to Portland!
lol the reason i got a headache is cuz u think u can f*** wit me
were you looking in the mirror? ;)
DailyHookahTip#138: Always fill the vase 1-2 inches above the bottom tip of the tube that goes down into the vase.
The book is officially available! And, www.davidshorter.com is all the rage!
Great idea. With all the personal finance problems we face, everyone should take a break from shopping & end Black Friday.
Meet and Greets today in Philadelphia...and maybe a Philly Cheesesteak from Ralphs. Booyah!
seriously thinking of taking tuesdays off so I can be home for all the new episodes of pretty little liars coming out
you know he was in jail, right? mm-hm
Thanks for your kind words. I'll be sure to pass that along to our designers.
..just landed at for their 'Tap This! Eat That' beer/ food truck pairing featuring
In the library to survive finals of ur first semester of grad school!! RT : #HeyWendy question, best place to eat a #cheeseburger?
Oh my lord. This guy shouldn't be working at Wendy's. He should be an underwear model.
much appreciated, love gettin the feedback from my fans!
I'm having so much fun!!!
RT "I have an iPad. I have no idea what to use it for, except to show how much better I am than everyone else." LOL SO TRUE
Apparently Dad is planning on visiting me in June. First I've heard of this. cc:
I think I'll just read a book until I get sleepy, along w. my sleep aid, b.c. it takes a while for it to work.
Never GIGI NEVER!!!! unless we get some flan then ill be forced to shush because i have to eat! :D
The iTriage man is heading over to the #ih3 party!!! Snap a photo with him for a chance to win!!!!!
Dear Gmail, I love your Preview theme, but the ads that cut off my messages, they're KILLING ME SLOWLY.
Time to do some yoga :)
Hoping that today will be good. No problems whatsoever.
ugh, synopsis.
soo i was walking in Walmart and they were blasting #unfriendyou! i was like Oh My God! aha, it made my day. ♥
Pls is LAST person who should be Twitter attacking anyone, given he's nothing but a quitter misogynist media whore
Pakcing up the Rock Star... Geez - has a lot of shoes.
Like the page
Twitter is telling me to follow WHAT THE FUCK ARE YOU SUGGESTING TWITTER
"Was This Worth It" by will be spun in the 12p hour TODAY on Harrisburg's 105.7 The X w/MoeRock. STREAM IT LIVE on www.1057thex.com!
hey mike. I work at a sports station in gainesville. Wanna call in and promote anything? It's 6-8pm 352-372-3700.
What does the future journal look like? Let's start with platform.
we can decorate them during craft time and then we can make them race eachother for exercise
Aerodynamically the bumblebee shouldn't be able to fly, but the bumblebee doesn't know that so it goes on flying anyway. Mary Kay Ash
That's very true! I'll always have the memories even if Renate doesn't.
That works well until you need to go UP a floor ;-)
dropping name got me a convo w sir charles - he said good things about you dingers, thanks for the heads up
Ellen's JCPenny commercials are making me think I won't ever shop there again.
OMG the 50% off sale! Great last minute gifts for coworkers/bosses/teachers (candles etc). Long lines tho - bring a book!
God teach me that forgiving is the highest level of strength and taking revenge is the first sign of weakness.
Yes, please! Thanks! Re Somewhere I have a record sleeve with a Magic Brain ad. Want me to try to find it?
Looking nice! Congratulations!!
Welcoming our newest members: Joakimlindroos, brenindavs & mitochondria4...Welcome aboard all
I obviously mean very little if anything to you.
Just downloaded Taylor Issues! YEEUHHH Lol Im going to make an Austin Mahone cd!
Ug. It is only Thursday night. Guess bed wins over another beer... That would be the responsible thing...
got anything stronger than tea? *winks back*
Hate being hungry late night.. Or early morning.
I can't even speak.
Have you ever picked up a postcard for a show you've never heard of and then gone to that show? I haven't.
I don't even know what the Vista campus looks like...I should probably figure that out.
mobile video movies hire can u serve me up following so hire my circle of talent appt needed
Is that a for certain yes?
Tonight check out the Centertown party at the Frame and Mat Shop on Washington! Music, Food and Art~Family style!
Thanks for inspiring me! I'll get right on it!
"I spent many hours in the bar arguing with other students about FRBR." -Jin Ha Lee
follow back?
Packing for move. Wife: "How many hatchets does one man need" Me: "I don't understand the question."
I expect most of my London time will be spend in the BL. Perhaps coffee break with if she's working there, too!
Happy Friday every one. lets get the weekend started!
Something provoked the whole globe to lower expectations, damn what's wrong with my generation?
clay guida while it may have been a good fight, dont see him making a challenge for the belt quite like you
sad huh?
I don't tend to migrate north, but I'm doing it tomorrow!
"I solemnly swear I am up to no good."
Hey ppl can u pleez follow me! Follow me, I follow back
lol who telling u this foolishness
How can we get you to feature us?
Why am I craving popcorn so bad!? Ah!
that's the only thing, my place is tiny. She seems pretty happy though.
Ha! Well done embracing.
Pissed the BOYZ are in the city performing and they didn't tweet about it before so I didn't know -.-
‎2 quick observations: Steven Tyler can no longer carry a tune and Wes Welker's sporting an incomparable 'stache today...go #Pats!
Telling not asking, pointing a finger talking too much, Biggest error is :Talking Head"
I bet living in a nudist colony takes all the fun out of Halloween....
Want a free 30-minute nutritional breakthrough session w/me? (By phone is okay!) Schedule through www.eating4achieving.com.
I'm taking a hair curler i hope one of the sicurites doesn't take it out and asks "whats this" it looks like a dildo yo.
Just heard you song "In Love Alone"
high school girl keeps looking at me and smiling....
My over-under list is for casino-related tweeps
DADDY STILL THERE?
"Free as in Puppies!" I LOVE this metaphor for using #Drupal. You have to feed, maintain and do parent time.
How ya doin' I loved you on that aston martin song w/ you inspire me baby. I can shoot you a TIGHT video!!
You know what makes uploading grades super fun????? NOTHING.
We are fortunate to have Richard Romano once again writing for
RT : : "Fighting for digital rights is as important as fighting for other civil rights."
No white just yet. You should try these on. Super cute!
Walter Murphy really is the man
you are my life saver!
Petersen: "Given how the profit motive has worked its way into our education system, [an open access] future should not be counted on."
Anyways .. keep ur haters hating.. GM!
Austerity for the rich and government stimulus for everyone else. There, your economy is fixed.
Anything that is unrelated to an elephant is irrelephant.
Still hungry! 3 more hours left at work though...
I'm at Ihop right now.. so after I leave, I'm ready whenever !!
he still didn't show?
Why is the name of the phobia for the fear of long words Hippopotomonstrosesquippedaliophobia?
Well we've wandered off by now. Further proof that you do not exist
broke nigga make me sick...... throw up
Cinco de Mayo dinner with and #Twitterless Chris & Chuck!
Cupcakes For All! will be buying cupcakes tomorrow at in Capitol Hill 12-4pm! Stop by, vote, get a cupcake!
Tweet:"I'm one in a million for healthy moms & babies around the world" to Million Moms Challenge-Women are Powerful-we empower other women
@ deanna, this time she tweeted tartness and contradiction
how can you be so loyal, kind, and stay true to the fans? Its amazing! What you do is so sweet! <3 #Love &
oh, I love key lime pie! Dipped in chocolate sounds divine. Did you enjoy?
Off to late-night grocery store visit...must have #BACON for Saturday morning!
Eating at There's a cute little gir singing "rumor has it!" over and over again. It's not annoying yet. Emphasis on 'yet'.
Dear Nato protestors, dont be out here trying to fuck my city up. You start tearing shit up we go start tearing yo asses up..lol
Yep, got it from the AHL store. It should be waiting for me when I get home tomorrow. I WILL SEND PICTURES.
your new social media rockstar for hire
hi brennin! The first time i saw u on x factor i relly think u are talented. Wishing u more success in terms of your career!
Hahaha !! I will send it to her !! Je t'aime ma cousine !!
that show is on? what channel?!
The weather's warming up and we're loving painting in the great outdoors... well outside. What's your DIY Project this spring?
ATTENTION WAFFLE LOVERS: Today we are offering the classic waffle for only $2 at our downtown location.
...true. Karma
Thanks for the yoga and wine last night, ! Most unique date ever. :) Then I ran this a.m.--woot!
Thank you. Can't wait to hear!
If you've got a low car you understand that a blown semi tire can destroy your world.
"British study found eating cheese before sleep produced vivid dreams. Different cheeses produce different types of dreams” THX
WE DO!! <3 & watch never say never!!
#wheniwas14 Three Men and a Baby was the top-grossing movie of the year. Who made Steve Guttenburg famous?
most likely to be trill og
Ugh seriously! I wanna punch him lol
What are you talking about? I didn't change anything? Wow...
First time in 4 years not going to Just unfair I'll be missing , etc
He the best 1 on the Lakers
God Morning (: Have a good day(:
R E T W E E T IF YOU WANT MORE FOLLOWERS
RT for support of marijuana legalization!
hey what's up!! Love what u do..keep it up
she won't take her eyes off it!!!
Put your &quot;Green Earrings&quot; on tonight and swing down to in Chattanooga. We're playing a new tune!
Oh yeah nfl draft yeah
I know it's early to mention it, but tonight (& all Fridays from now on) every cocktail on our list is $5!
what tracks??
still a little incredulous this is only my third paper of the semester
Dancers = athletes with style.
guess I'll finish watching the #saints #49er's game now. lol
At this moment, I'm about 95% sure that I'm going to nap in my car at lunch.
We are seeming to get sicker as a nation. What is your opinion as to why this is?
Press on,Wisconsin, don't let up!You never know how close to a breakthrough we might be!Turn this setback into a decisive victory! Press on!
Amazing office surprise visit from whose amazing shoes I work hard to fill! We miss you, Speer!
congrats on today's premiere. You don't need NBC to give you a star. You were born one. (side note: NBC is in 4th too)
tell him you gotta get to the Ski Swap to sell some gear. He'll understand.
Maybe it's a condition of getting older: we forget about the bears' defenseless inner ears.
Overheard TA talking about students: "I want to send them all to, like, hermeneutical bootcamp."
Asked a friend if he was interested in Cologne. His earnest reply - "Hm i am stinky . What kind?"
did your vegan lifestyle get thrown out the door this weekend? If only for just a day. .
Krazie Bone's Twitter bio: "from the world's most influential rap group Bone Thugs N Harmony". C'MON! Missing words "AND BEST", Krazie
: no j wasn't asking you that. I wasn't asking you that at all. I just want to know why you're so interested in calling ...
Just farted on (;
okay good! Lol
#sschat does this. They hang outside her door and have different codes printed for each class.
Hahaha! I really don't give af!! going w/ what makes me happy!! :D
Thank you Jon!
I'm not going to be able to sleep tonight
I can't right now. I hate seeing Austin upset.
moving to the in-laws cottage on Conesus lake this weekend. Still looking for a house in Livonia
LMFAO definitely wasn't about you ...
Please everyone please follow the will for me please I want to follow up to it ==> FOLLOWW @ LEiLA_SWAG_ (( SOUTHOUT )) PLEASE GO EVERYONE,,
just left the park. It's coming along well.
“: Urban Meyer said they want throw 3 times for every run. Gotta get that passing attack rolling.” 2 of 3 will be jump-passes
RT Most CLE doesn't hit key brain requirements: Neither intense, novel, scary, interactive, diverting nor emotional.
Sure I COULD watch MLBNetwork & see what happened in tonight's #MLB games and how my fantasy teams did, but Spaceballs is on.
Has Kenny tweeted you back yet?
Im finding out alot of portland dudes is on some downlow type shit
Come on #jimmyjohns don't fail me now!
At the 1st annual Technical & Analytics Conference in San Diego! Am learning about language from USC prof Michael Arbib
Gay struggle is not the same as black folks struggle. U not gay till u show it. U black when u walk in the door dumb ass fuckers
Awesome news is that for same $$$ I pay now in Chicago suburbs for a studio apt, I can get a two bedroom apt in Atlanta suburbs.
Dally really needs to make a Facebook so I don't have to think of clever things to put as our status. WHO HAS TWITTTTERRRR
Count it!
Tomorrow you will need to use your spidey sense to figure out if something is wrong?
TY for the #inspiring #TEDtalk -- we posted on #Facebook too! Also check out our new #mobile #accounting tool,
Watched Network once again! Amazing movie!
holy f... fried chicken overload
Im fina pay city of Memphis u Brng me $20
Thanks so much! That's all i need to hear to keep playing. Best to you, VOo
Mexicans are much bigger consumers of video (via FB and YouTube) than any other country in Latin America.
if this is collaborative recipe making, I'm in! will let you know how it turns out.
Before 2012 I Would Love For To Follow Me :'D <3 <3 <3
The #Oscars are so motivating!!
How are you? :)
all of my followers need to watch the trailer for the movie. "ted" it has mark walburg and mila kunis in it..fucking hilarious!!!!
Thanks for following us!
"It’s as though Mitt inherited all of his father’s noblesse, but none of the oblige."
no that ratchet place lol....just a show about ME finding my place in San Fran :)))
We got The Gold Trigon. We are so awesome.
You damn right... they can't stop Calvin Johnson
This is setting up to produce one hell of a brawl between the #Islanders and #Penguins later this year.
ohh ok thank uu is the group name official christofer drew awareness?:)
I have SO much reading to do today. #ShootMe 😒🔫
wow she called me daddy n how long we been knowing each other 4 days got damn
will do! Thanks for following (:
Groceries. Check. Laundry. Check. Big breakfast. Check. Dishes. Check. Workout. Check.
is a great thing. Love the pictures and videos.
sometimes i wish i could see into the future at what is come but til then time waits for none
Hope you caught us Rockin Out Autism on News 12 today! see you saturday at ROCK OUT AUTISM 3!
haha ok we'll discuss this further later
Welcome to today's visiting groups: and Bowman's Hill Wildflower Preserve Members!
Hello to my wonderful, handsome, beautiful, gorgeous and hot followers!
i pursue no one that does not give me reason to
Only an hour left of Prodigy's birthday where I'm at..
Not an inaccurate description.
#newsweek Canceling my subscription.
Brazil can not be serious about passing this bill on the rainforest! That will destroy climate and the ancient people still thriving today!
I love it when the South Philly neighbors yell through Severino's mail slot. "Sevy! Sevy!"
Can't wait till.I.start driving
Viola Davis at the #oscars --> wow!!
Oh that sucks n ur welcome. =)
In Greece, world looking more and more like a recent novel.
#WhatUNeedToDoIs Stop blaming yourself for things that weren't your fault and take responsibility for things that were your fault
Thank you so much for following me! It's been my dream to sing on live radio for you! If you'd allow that that would be amazing
sorry primo I don't check my twitter that much...what's good?
Sometimes I let him do the wide shots when I feel like getting blazed in my winnie
Michael Owen has been sidelined with yet another injury. Turns out the door hit his ass on his way out of Manchester United.
#ThatAwkwardMoment when ur mom walks in while ur having sex.
How'd that shit go ?
yeah we won 4-3 in the eighth inning.
you gotta get to the truck, man!
So excited to be following , the actress who brought Effie Trinket to the screen!
is one of my fave celeb apprentice players. Smart. Creative. Strong. Passionate. Sexy. Great model for businesswomen everywhere!
Olive garden w/ the sis
90%Grind 10%Sleep .... I'm sure this will all pay off in the long run!!!
Ya! I'll call you tomorrow or Friday so we can plan!
Amare Stoudamire doubtful for Game 4, ha! So r the Knicks..series over! #nba playoffs
id rather see him stay but i dont see it
ha, odd/funny memories of certain miles.
Save up to 75% on all poker chip sets @ www.eproducts4less.biz
and by the way are you thinkin about the way u draft thursday?
I'm pretty sure the entire desert has flown into my eyes. Working outside is not fun today.
Yoga seems to give great relief to people in tension or stress
#ShoutOut 2 4 all their help tonight! Thanks guys! Look forward 2 working with u. Ya'll go check out their music!
I Wish I Could Say My Hero Knows I'm Alive... =(
same here. Very busy for the last few months thus on twitter a lil less.
What is the gospel? The royal announcement that Jesus is Lord.
this sucks!!
Awesome to see you respond to fans on your Twitter. Keep bringing it! :D
Girls keep sayin they want something start tryin to find him
2 new songs ready for tonight. Maybe 3. Buck's Tavern 9pm
Steak n Shake run!
One day, I want to live in a loft in downtown Austin. One day…. Who knows when that'll be though.
Oh, I'm there! Without a doubt. See you this weekend!!
's Special Engagements cont'd yesterday with WoodKid. Catch the director’s cut of the show today at 2P CT: ht.ly/8G7ZP
"feels like" is listed as windchill or heat index in the API. NA if neither is applicable in mild/fair conditions
Lost time is never found again. Benjamin Franklin
hopefully if you have reservations at this one they will seat you on time
That's awesome!
LOL RT : Instagram can't save you guys from the truth. We know you're black as tar.
Its #fridaythe13th ...no wonder my day is shitty!
TROLLIN. RT Damn didn't know this man people didn't want me in #NY might just get what you asking for!
I can't handle how much I keep listening to this song.
But why solve real problems when you can scapegoat the gays? Clearly wars are fought and kids go hungry because I'm gay.
I like to think we are frenemies.. :)
he also called you a pretty hot babe(; umm I'll ask my followers(:
“: maybe that's what happens when you make accusations in a story without any hard evidence or proof.” blissnorance
soaking up the sun- stuffing face- great combo
(c) Drama happens. People start starting shit with people & other stuff. The people have lifes.. You cant expect them to not have a (c)
summer school starts n 17 min.
•...makes you independent of wrong political decisions.
biggie shouldn't have gone to LA
Vote Victor Garcia for Wrong turn 5 director! -V
you gotta! don't worry I'll go slow.
Still in the frame, the camera defies smartphone onslaught - Business Standard
I look like hell rolled over this morning
Gonna see tomorrow
“: house was just on fire #stupidjames #learnhowtocook” dumbass! Doesn't know how to cook!
Our network is currently undergoing mitigating a major DDOS attack, with extremely heavy load on all nodes. The joke is not funny.
ASAP like Rocky
God i know!!! Hey Cameron can you— NO SORRY MY GRANDMA IS WATCHING.
Look who is on twitter! hahaha what's up man
El golf wang
#Bears RT : Eight teams have five prime-time games: Broncos, Steelers, Chargers, Bears, Packers, Giants, Eagles, 49ers.
Ok ok, you bring with you, and we can ball at Chesapeake, then we play a mile away at the performance lab. ;-)
Good nigt sleep z and M
American flags made in china... Its just wrong
hey what's up how ya been
Great #win yesterday by the #Seahawks! We can still make the #playoffs!! Who's ready to hit that #HappyHour with #Bartab?
Lollapalooza Just Announced Red-Hot Lineup for 2012 Music Festival
give me five dollars.
happy birthday to the most beautiful woman in the world hope u enjoy it
Bike Trip with Yoya | $10 | Doors 8PM| Buy your ticket ASAP! |
Rockies need some kind of mojo on the road, they seem not to be able to let the Bats go Wild....Let's beat those Mets Tommorrow.
Brainstorming session at "Building Cities through Social Media". Each group coming up with 3 BIG ideas!
#ImThatPersonWho thanks my haters for pushing me to be who i am today.
I have a few thoughts on that. I'm thinking of doing a Google+ hangout for more Q&A. Interested?
Don't lose yourself, trying to hold on to someone who doesn't care about losing you
country music artist
I really wish The Critic came back. Had the theme song stuck in my head all day
Our thoughts go out to all our neighbors that were involved in the fires this week.
& - We hope 2 C U both at our Shoot To Cure HD Event @ Chargers Park on June 3 at 6pm. ;)
I feel better now lol
Messed around and stepped on my sunglasses...broke them...just copped a new pair...
. Oatmeal made with coffee? That sounds interesting... is it good?
I was just quizzed about my knowledge of hockey by the HVAC man... highlight of my day, sadly. ;)
Defeat is not the worst of failures. Not to have tried is the true failure.
Only one more day to save during our Friends & Family 15% off event! Have a great and glamorous weekend
I hear that. Well, at least you can start planning the summer ;)
You stay classy, redneck in Target yelling across several aisles to ask his wife what kind of tampons work best for her.
One of my great disappointments in Avengers was it felt weird that Banner was all hanging in Tony's car at the end. Pretty un-Banner-like.
May or may not have injured myself at the gym today...Guess its time to stop training at 90%+ 1RM for a while
nope. Haha. It was probably something stupid
Each tweet lovingly handcrafted by a Huguenot artisan.
Rumors spread faster then wildfires...... rumors=NotTrue
As an added #bonus, Dance can help keep the body young!
Your getting me addicted to youtube and all this music and groups that are awesome ! And I have HW :'(
I love my babies
raw fruit balls look crazy good. Can you adopt me please so I can eat at your house
my mom & I walked from publix to the STARBUCKS on Old Cutler & 168 th
m, maybe you can use all this research for your future dissertation on the anthropology of crazy New York housewives! Haha!
not to mention you won't get that $6000 laptop
“: If you search "askew" in google search, the page will tilt slightly clockwise. (Try it)” this shit mad true doe
PLEASE wish a happy 17th bday! It would make her life!
National Restaurant Association Show TODAY! :)
We hope you all had a great Thanksgiving weekend!
Adding sound to movies would be like putting lipstick on the Venus de Milo. - Mary Pickford
RT : When one of the all-time greats #JoeHammond tells you your jumpshot is #pure ...what can u say?
congrats! I waited til the last one right before I graduated! Haha
Thanks! Bypass works on any phone w/ internet access. Go to www.bypasslane.com to register for your free account!
Me and are having quite the hard time on our diets..
Ah is in the chicago airport... and I live 5 mins away from an airport :( just need to know which one she's at.
It's either Greinke or Hamilton. I'd prefer Greinke; too many issues, on and off the field, for Hamilton.
Thanks so much for your vote to #PreserveNYC! Tell us in a tweet: why does the Alice Austen House matter to you?
We have the power to create change!
69 followers!!!! THANK YOU!! You all are the best!! :)
The day is not over and I wish to extend a HAPPY MOTHERS DAY to all the MOTHERS throughout the world. NLD Mom/cancer survivor
I LOVE PARRY SO MUCH YOU HAVE NO IDEA!!!!!!
Final day at work. I'm oddly euphoric and excited about finding my next gig
When ur young you can't wait to become grown. When u grow up u wish u were kid again.
aw, you had to know there would be some controversy in Florida. Absentee ballots up in the air...
lets go to cancun. just me and you.
About a half an hour until they bowl in SEATTLE with the CAIR Project and in HOUSTON with !!
Craving sushi and no one is free to eat with me. :(
I have been taking classes and doing workshops. Where is a good place to do them besides actor key and sag foundation?
Tell me a lie♥.♥
Dear cold temperatures, please do feel free to go get bent.
Shpongle eoto dancing smiles more dancing... Oh life is good
"Where there is shouting, there is no true knowledge." (Leonardo da Vinci)
5$ho thanks fam. I checked it out nice tracks lets wrk.
I would be too!!! That's horrible!
Last day in Green Bay. Shopping and getting dinner with my mom. :)
It takes more than just a good looking body
Nope, I was cooking my oven. Seemed like a good idea at the time...
I really need to buy a shaver that gets really close because the shave I have now is not to my expectations
You know what? Forget the room extention #, they don't help. Just go to www.shindigtarot.com/directory/abracadabra
I am friends w/couple in AZ trying to adopt a baby & having no luck. A baby would be blessed to have them for parents Plz pray for them.
what a nice teammate! Looking forward to 2012 season. See you in NY 4/13
more likely is that I will just use all of them and eat excessive amounts of fast food!
i'm boutta DM you bout somethin right quick bro.
You're not the only one! All of the #FLAPanthers crowd hasn't in a long time. Kudos to them. Color me impressed!
probability isnt always accurate specially in life. sometimes even if the chances of something happening are in your favor
MUSIC = WIND. You can`t see it but you`re touched when you listen
I just said something super forward lol see his current status and my comment. hah.
Great, a wonderful video of a goaltender daydreaming. I'd rather watch a fly die on someone's face. #who cares
Basically. RT": Listening to skip bayless makes you lose brain cells."
we love a good mystery!
A nigga wit money is just that. "A nigga wit money". funds dnt teach manners or morals. or how 2 give bac 2 those who help u out
no surprise there!
Happy Sunday!!!
at the expense of disrespecting our own people,and unfortunately,most of us are killed by us
i Want more of my mothermonster!!!!
playoffs baby. When it counts.
Oh I forgot, our TGIFs were very different: Perfect Strangers, Full House, Mr. Belvedere, Just the 10 of Us, Family Matters, etc
Sigh. It never stops.
so good!
Football season is almost upon us. Crystal Clear Pools supports the longhorns to victory this season
follow me
thanks for the RT. Marine life needs our help. Animals and children can't protect themselves. Pls peeps we need u.
“Never forget yesterday, but always live for today, because you never know what tomorrow can bring, or what it can take away
Screw you Peyton.
Thanks 4 the #FF mentions Have a gr8 weekend!
next week is the season finale. I wonder how it ends. I didn't like this season too much.
Hha. Thank you Jordan! You always make me laugh!(: haha.
My coochie said hi.......
it was the getting back up after falling...I'm not sure if it was pre order.
so true.
I love Drose, but he shouldn't even have been playing. So unhealthy, healthy body parts bear all weight and stress. This was bound to happen
Thanks for the mention!
I am so excited!!! The prize is pride!!!
I should probably listen to dreamchasers II
The only way to have a friend is to be one.
Nothing more beautiful than chasing a dream and laughing at the opposition.
It's hard to look cool on Muni while your earbuds are blaring "Call Me Maybe."
On a train from AC to Philly then flying to Denver in time to register for day 1A of HPT Colorado tonight at 6.
i already wanna go tanning again uh
Never imagined I would someday find myself sitting outside the vet's office with a container of mutt pee in a bag.
You got the swag sauce you drippin swagu unh
Can't believe im going to school with one eye looking like a reproductive organ
Was just swept off my feet. Literally. We're breaking out the fancy steps...
RT : I need help with Word. How do I get the Level 2 table of contents entries NOT to show a page number? TIA.
This "I Love Lucy" ab Ricky being neglected bc Lucy is pregnant & the doc telling her to make him feel like the center of attn is bullshit.
A creative man is motivated by the desire to achieve, not by the desire to beat others. - Ayn Rand
NIH has 180 patient beds for medical trials. Specialist collaboration from all over the world.
LETS GO CANES. Canes recover onside kick. On next play, QB Stephen Morris to T. Benjamin for Long TD. UVA 24 UM 19 4th (4:39)
has ambivalent feelings for the backroom's physical form. There's hope in respect to ease of movement and work flow, but it is U-G-L-Y!!!
Don't settle for less.. u don't need shows to blow up. Market self right and you'll get the calls and paypa wit it
Based on my interest in the teen comedy Project X, Netflix suggests I might also like the controversial German gay film Taxi Zum Klo!
Joe AND I will be at KDWB 101.3 radio station in Minneapolis, MN tomorrow. Come hang out, maybe even meet him!
#mahopac bound for the weekk. hope some skels come outta their coma's
Haircut! Fuckin legit.
Also phenomenal how quickly the idiot Punch and Judy show can raise the curtain in the comments section.
TheatreSports Team meets tonight at 7pm, our place. We'll bring the chairs, you bring the energy. Okay, fine. We'll bring some energy, too.
Show tonight at Grace College in indiana
Orlando! RT There's only one NBA city where the OKC Thunder haven't won since the franchise relocated in 2008
This day was made for motorcycle rides. Amazing!
My amazing BF got me all the Hopelessly Devoted to You samplers for Christmas.
barf I hope so!
a rowdy teenage girl loudly stood up for me in a dunkin donuts. Her name was Taija and she was not ok with some guy cutting in front of me.
going on a feildtrip to a beach with my class... tidepooling, id so much rather be laying out with a few beeahs
Just FOUND THEM!
And we are live with Game 2 of on SL TV and across the state with Comcast Indiana 81 ... Tune in and tweet us too!
I never knew twitter followings could be such a source for competition.
Please look for Berry Horny, our super tasty summer ale. We reformulated it and we want to know what you think of the new recipe.
RT : The "acting" in a Cinemax a porn is HILARIOUS. So True.........
Cool your jets with the referral campaign. Everybody I know already uses your service. Do you want my pets to sign up?
better than bdubs!!
Hey if you're in Atlanta...I'm on Good Day Atlanta tomorrow morning on the 8-9am hour talking about my book.
Chameleon Productions Presents Love Stinks. Dante's in the U-District, Seattle. $5 cover 21+. $3 Wells. Get your asses there bitches!!!
... Your heart full of joy, For today arrived a Baby Boy, Gods own Son, Was born this morn!
LOL So are you Kristen!! Thank you!!
Really hope gets that #BestNewArtist Grammy ain't no one on that nomination list that deserves it more in my opinion
I'll get my protein the old fashioned way, thank you very much!
I know & I'm so mad at directions cause they are hating on BTR when it's BTRs tour
Thanks! Feel free to email us any events or specials that you would like to see in SFA!
That is like a super hero story Well played. Congrats. Good luck and be sure to reach out. When do you depart?
the official due date strikes in 18 days. So, I am basically a ticking time bomb.
hahahh call me!
reaffirming my belief that you are in fact awesome!
I want chocolate cake with chocolate frosting and a strawberry on top m :)
is lame. $550 for jack shit #fact and he can't afford to pay it back.
Downtown with my beaners tonight >>
Where do you find the most "news"? Facebook, Twitter, or other? Let us know!
A LITTLE too cold for me in New York!
#OTGTIPS YOU NEVER KNOW WHO YOUR AROUND, ACT LIKE YOU GOT SOME SENSE!
how yo u gonna follow me on twitter and not talk to me on facebook
The Band Perry with a Glen Campbell tribute. Who's wearing the country hoola skirt in the band?
If you're going through hell keep going. What idiot would wanna stay there?
Lucky! Crazy! Both?
Join us for 13th Annual Maui Chinese New Year on Saturday, January 28 from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Great food, crafts, and the lion dance, too!
#fcat 2morrow i didnteven study oh well ill study in the morning hope all of u do great c;
Ryan Miller, Director of Campus Life at the Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, IL
Hopefully will start developing my personal website over this winter break!
Want to keep your teeth white as possible? Use a straw. It helps drinks bypass the teeth and gums lessening the chances of staining.
There's a bomb threat at school today.... Welp. I hope we don't die.
he's a 10
- who won?
“ This is that bad attitude weather”
Hair. Off. Freedom!!!
I give you, the Griswold family Christmas tree. Lotta sap in here! Looks great. Little full... Lotta sap.
todays my birthday. Can you please wish me a happy birthday?
If they allow nudity on TV, we will be like Europe
I know that one! It's the one fancy offices have. I would love it but the coffee has to be a fortune! You choose a flavor...
watching the boondocks in class >>>>>>>>>
Attacking a lengthy #todo list today. Here's to self-driven productivity!
No ine is up....time to call clitoris girl!
Apparently my "mesmerizing" handwriting and perfect grammar gives people reason to believe that I am a robot.
"This is a complex problem," said weed scientist David Shaw in remarks to a national "summit" of weed experts in Washington
RT : classes have been busy busy. Thank you for this terrible weather!!!!---No prob..it's what we do. ha ha! happy spinning 2day ;o)
Legs & Glutes are feeling the wrath of my will 2nite...OUCHIE!!!!
Pizza or not pizza...I can't decide.
i HAVENT WENT ANYWHERE.. LAYING THE ROAD MAP FOR MY COME BACK.....KEEP YA'LL UPDATED
Ok, let's try this. Let's keep our runs separate, on the path, screw the treadmill And let's keep our studies, tweet free :)
Hehe well enjoy your dinner ;) I'll start to study & you definitely are ;) & awh it looks awesome though! You're amazing xo
“: ewwwwwwww what taste! Lol”<< sane thing I wanna know lol
Bass Trombone is not at all something you want me to do Chip. More power to the people that do though . .
Lost respect for Chris Peterson for selfishly voting TCU 18th on his ballot. If TCU is 18th then Boise ST can be no better than 19th.
just coincidence... :)
Look here 'cause we missing 2 rabbits and I'm fixin' to find out who took 'em!
CES unveiled was a blast! Lifestyle Connect is now official...
This makes me especially miss you
Unpacked my bag: I have to get my Sharp jersey dry cleaned AGAIN!!
it's a Chevy I believe
Mike Ditka just said the phrase, "Giving the city of Detroit a bad name."
Processing the #tedxcbus post-event to do list. It isn't over quite yet! Big thanks to for a great partnership.
my son worked event last week for couple wife has 1yr 2live-cancer husband threw elaborate wedding for her-gave her everything!
hurry it up.
3) Do you need a ride to the polls? Call 410-338-4036.
Seems legit
Working waiting on Monday Nite Football. Follow us
She was amazing in The Help - so deserving. Im bummed that 50/50 wasn't nominated. That was personally one of my faves.
the Art of Waiting is making me very sleepy. Don't know what to do with myself.
Thank you <3
"I'm not a native Detroit-tian..." from a caller. Really? Detroit-tian. Really?
Or wat? Cuz...I dnt wanna tell u tha whole story but everyone hates me now cuz of wat I did -____- x(
clippers won!
You are what you Tweet!
Meeting in newsroom right now about potential changes to our coverage. What kind of stories do you want to see in local news?
i'm trying to get my iphone case but it keeps on saying that my credit card information is not authorized .____________.
“: About time to head over to club rio. & rockin it on ” Going all out for our city tonight!
true. I just want there to be opportunity for retail, services, and restaurants, not only the latter.
sorry haven't been on been moving
baggage ; drama ; no real job ; no relationship skills ; no pipe game : exgirl Issues ; no swag
RT : RT : I would like to meet Dora's parents and ask them why they let that bitch go everywhere.
#signspeopleshouldwear "ima wild koon....don't listen to anything i say!"
"well today it's Michelle"
Every time I wear black tights all I think about is it looks like Minnie Mouse's legs
Just had my first reindeer sausage of the year. It's so sunny downtown, even M.A. was in a good mood.
[insert random tweet]
Food trucks at our holiday event in December, coming back for a big event in March. Huge success!
So sad...I love this show, and glad it returning for a Season 6!
Congrats to Ken Hedrick & Ryan Butler (Tulsa office) who both co-brokered a Tractor Supply in Indiana this week!
what to do what to do hum
a Samsung phone from Verizon. It's not an internet phone though, I would never.
need to tweet more.
Got MW3 @ 5PM Today and been playing for 6 Hours Straight
Quote of the day: "We make a living by what we get. But we make a life by what we give." - Winston Churchill
My LulSistah Replace Me Wit My OldFrewd! #.Tragic :(
Akinade: e-book completely unheard-of, strange idea in Africa.
Sparks Restaurant in Bryn Mawr it is brand new and I hear good things!!
Back to LA and excited to gear up for our finishing funds campaign for Gold Stars. I'm so proud of this film!
My Valentine is in australia. No flowers, or shit to walk around with all day.
Good for you. Me too; although some days are more fun than others.
you don't need the lottery, your music is your ticket.
me and Ty were texting about about it and we said you too don't get you panties in a bunch. We should do it though
Thanks! So glad to be here!
Thanks. Am surveying a different group as well to see if standards vary.
HAPPY BIRTHDAY to the best grandma in the world.. my 2nd parent!!! 86 and still standing strong!!!
Headed to a wedding. Hope they don't mind me showing up in a Rangers jersey and flip flops!
What if food turned into muscle instead of fat?
Thrifty Thurs 3 SMALL PLATE SPECIALS +14 on menu... $2 off all craft cocktails Smitty's in bar
I just saw a tweet that Carlos Fuentes is dead, but can't find any news items that corroborate. Anyone have a link?
4 months till I can go to my ccw class. Gonna be able to carry legally. Yeah boy hollow points
great i cant log into tumblr -_-
In the next hour, retweet #8x10designs.com and pay only $250 for a full website! Times running out
I do not have any leads...I'd say call Allison :)
I know. Didn't mean to imply that, and really learned a lot from reading it.
Main goal for today: Watch #BiggestLoser without snacking for two straight hours. It really shouldn't be that hard!
Thank you!
The nostrils, cheeks, and chin. They can also develop on the chest, neck, abdomen, back and legs .keloidsurvey.com
I'm excited. I get 27 points a day, and this morning for breakfast, I used 4.
Do away with Dry, and Itchy Skin!!! Invest in a Humidifier.
The results are not up. We are hoping to post the winners once all of them have been notified. =)
An idea is not responsible for the people who believe in it.
Thanks girl!!!
Great meeting you tonight at the DVD premiere and dinner. Driver has to pick up this pace...we have at least 800 in line
Every piece of sh-t every man has to eat every day of his life is personal. They call it business. OK. But it’s personal as hell.
My brain is swelling in this advanced social media course. So many ideas, so little time.
assholes means assholes. dogs means horny. I WIN
9/11 Tribute Custom and Micro Beds are up now! Check it out on #productionvault!
no u don't liar lol but one fluttering and the other watching me tweet and pootin on my damn pillow
Lonely drive to Tulsa! Merr
I'm sure my blood pressure goes up every time I watch The Bulls and The Heat play.
yes it was!!! We need more of that!
Always Smile Bro! Follow Me! #BelieberBoy 94
Bad day to go to the beach...
Off to one of my favorite events Live In the Vineyard!
I've done it maybe twice in my life.
We added an exta fundraiser that did really well.
With the way he's pushing Verona's Andrew Argall, the heavy favorite in their No. 2 singles titles match, Luskin may have earned the right.
If Tebow can win games in Denver. Manning can win a Superbowl. Wow huge deal and a perfect fit
so now the government can tell us who to marry......when does it end? land of the free only for straight white men. yep that sounds right.
Rookie draft sleeper: Dane Sanzenbacher...a smart, tough WR might find a role in Martz's offense
Cupcake lovers! Be sure to come and check out our spooky flavors all next week!! Boo-nana, cookies n scream, and many more festive flavors!
Mid afternoon dance party, who's invited...me, who's all coming...me.
Complete Locksmith lock and key Service inIndianapolis - Residential, Commercial and Automobile
oh ok, well hey imma go to bed, goodnight, ttyl, peace out
If my husband takes pictures of me giving birth I will proceed to punch him in the face
oh yeah baby, I'll have a mojito just for you tonight ;-) woo-saaaaaa!
glad to see you on board on #ArtsTechSF's meetup page! "Bi-coastal" was the word of Wednesday evening.
yea but without women jimmy lil ass wouldn't be runnin around the house lmao
Starting Monday submit your guesses as to how you think will do. The person closest to his actual score will win a prize.
TONIGHT @ THE MINT LOUNGE "DONT KILL ME WITH IT" SPRING BREAK EDITION W? ON THE 1'S & 2'S DONT MISS THIS MOVIE
and not just political conference calls either.
I think she works at Fremulon with RT : You know who could really use Sarah Phillips? Entertainment 720...
and I love books on war! I know chick lit is huge, I wonder what the male equivalent is...
I've never been happier that Evan Woodington's not on Twitter.
#HighSchoolMemories I had to clean around the campus for leaving the gate to get something to eat. I was hungry. Didn't clean sh** doe.
"Your niece naked is fucking awesome."
Bch deliveries on the lake? Dont have to move!
Just picked up my press pass for Photo Expo. Check in on www.blog.stellakramer.com starting tomorrow for our updates LIVE from the Javits!
our pleasure! congrats! #runnerds RT : More thanks for support around Sunday's marathon!
May Day grafitti on the Steele Bridge thanks to protestors
Funny RT : see ya Clair....never trust a lesbian convict.
So true. : I'm so critical of myself that I honestly forgot that I'm great
Dead ants found in cookie-eating girl's ears
they all cracked up when my boss asked about their English skills and he explained that French people never can understand him
Just got the new miss may I single...dope
Having a bad night
check out www.bubbabrain.com for smartboard review games for the classroom
& Wsj biz ed Tom Enwright“: Besides Rob, most famous Wisconsin Rapids resident = Dick Trickle.”
How can you tell if a monster has a glass eye?When it comes out in conversation.
nice manners! Followed! : )
Ah, I see. The Corona case was all the news when I was there in February. Sounds like it still is. Been going since December right?
Hope you found the workshop useful, Liz!
simply o simply o simply o
that makes me feel better ha! But really not too big of a deal right?
There really should be a tracking system for buses, I'm f'ing freezing and have been waiting for 25 minutes for a bus.
hell yeah nigga
Time for me to run for political office. I am sick of tea-partiers and their stupidity. I am sick of libretarians, democrats and greens
Heading to the conference? Visit the program at booth 1832!
Jordan to the rescue!
haha, ditto over here! 5 cherries....does that give you a clue ; )
Good Luck!!! :D
Sweet, intimate worship this morn with the 'Called Out' students...and powerful words about waiting on the Lord from
Have a safe and happy Spring Break Blue Hens! Bring us back some souvenirs.
hay how r u
haha oh no!!!! I really don't care for the old laptop. I want a new one.
I could go for some Cafe Con Leche right about now!
it's Ay Chihuahua!
RT!! “: Phase 2 of the #MSGTransformation can wait!! Next up: the #Devils. #LetsGoRangers”
Here was our best answer from today's question! RT :Andy cuz its awesome when he headbangs and flips it haha
Essay ready to go now I can just chill for the rest of the weekend :)
No better way to take from bachelorette to bride than with a Burlesque lesson! Let's shimmy, twirl, & pop ladies.
OMGOMGOMGOMG. BRIANNA!! Are you pinching her back to make her smile bigger so that I'll be even sadder?
"Your mothers expendable." Love Howard Stern!
you and my sis has the same spelling name but not the same age.
New handle alert! Did you notice the change in our name? Instead of mentioning us , now tweet at us with the handle
If you down with d #KushCampers RT
Having a glass of whiskey for you right now. Cheers!
Reds pissing me off again!
Our flavors at our Harvard Sq location: Lavender-Honey & Nutella! Come and get it!
You're welcome.
RT : #ScaleConf has been exceptionally excellent. Thanks enormously to and (I concur!)
I want to get a paintball gun and shoot the bike riding idiots who don't know how to bike and act stupid
RT : Every #solopreneur should listen to 's 5 Critical Tests Women Face in 1st Year of Self-Employment...
Getting ready to interview in the Cricket Muve Music lounge! follow Chris and
Hanging out with him today <3 :D
haha the HT is following me too and I never actually lived there. No clue how they found me.
So I just saw this tweet...smmfh RT : Detroit playing...aye IT'S SO COLD IN THE D :)!!!!... LMFAOOOOOO
Freakin Tired! its a Jungle out there......
Why so hawttt?(:
just saw on cnn that arnold and maria are splitting up. weird and sad.
...I accept your challenge of rebellion.
RIP Ryan. You will be missed.
my 24 yo friend committed suicide. We didn't see it coming. We were all blindsided
I guess, but he had fun doing it, even if his good cooking did make me fat in the first couple years we were together.
Like is it the real thing , or is it jus a one night stand! my jam :)
red wine
What's good Atlanta? It's to nice out to be inside let do something!
“: Shortest horror story ever: No nutella left D:” lol I instantly thought of
From Piano Blu: As of Sunday, May 13, 2012, Piano Blu is now CLOSED. We truly want to thank you all for our seven plus years of......
dint sell the ipod yet ima brong the money 2morrow
The fact of the matter is, (as a matter of fact,) facts do matter.
yo point is
I didn't know there was an 18th Street dog park! :-o
I am looking for talented call center professionals. Contact me ASAP if we have worked together previously (Brooklyn & Union, NJ locations)
Now you wanna talk science? Good lord, woman! Pour yourself a drink and watch the Golden Globes. I'm signing off now.
This is so good!
exactly tho a true women wont look for a man to save the day, shell b a bad bitch and do it herself. Shell juss want a PIC
If followed me that would make her so cool and me too.
Passionate about eco-style? Or green and organic? Great at engaging people with your writing? Be part of our team. Msg me for more info.
Why is Michael Connelly so addictive? Reading Black Echo.
Anyone want a shoutout? (:
I love you
I would have dominated that.
Absolutely ! Hope you are doing great!
How Do I Know When He's Online?
I still have this new format for the NFL Draft. This 3hr first not is just a big cock tease.
Tune into 750-AM now to hear a hand of blackjack being played w winnings to
At Peter Luger's. Happy 30th Birthday to my beautiful wife, !
you're welcome :)
Since I'll be at MayDay parade tomorrow, I'm spending the next hour on the couch with coffee & guilty pleasure, Vampire Diaries. #Mom'sDay!
Yeah! they be doing some crazy ass shit! i wish i was one of them!
Dinner last night and lunch today at GT Fish & Oyster; the weekend is off to a fantastic start!
For those in fantasy baseball, Brian Fuentes named closer in Oakland, Casey Janssen Jays closer for now...
Thanks for articulating how I feel about my day today.
I'm bout to win my soccer tournament!!.
Tonight is the night I smile, sing, and bounce to the sweet and sexy music of are you ready Wisconsin?
Coupland Dancehall tonight with Jon Wolfe. Get there early, we go on around 9!
Positive Vibes around me...
Please take the NYS Legislatures advice on Assembly Res No. 01206. Declare May Aviation Appreciation Month in NYS!
ONLY DID WHAT I HAD YESTER. WAS HURTING FIERCE ALL DAY..I'LL GET YA BACK..COUNT ON IT..T/F/S..
um.... just siting here anyone want to talk ??:)
I must still be in conference mode, being terribly efficient today. Brunch, laundry, organizing. Now to pack for a week
I looked ahead to the open road, thought about the people and what they know, and wrote a book called "People Don't Know Nothin"
the day of your concert in NYC is my birthday! but omg if you wished me a happy birthday there I'd be so happy :)
You should bring me some Ice Cream though Lbs :-)
So apparently my stepsister might be on
Thanks so much for the RT. Much appreciated!
Watching tv
I'll be out there next week, we should meet up.
Looking forward to a night of fashion, beauty and fun! Our kitchen is gearing up for the #SpringFlash at tomorrow!
I need to calm my happy ass down & breathe
The Secret World Of Arrietty Blu-ray does indeed look absolutely gorgeous. An essential Ghibli Blu-ray to own. Light on supplements though.
Uh super hero in de flesh even et ma worse im de best fo de finish istretch..!!!!
Just wrote a remix/ reimagined type version of Smile,This Song Is About You!
yeah a waste of my brain cells.
There's a drug deal going on behind my house. Kinda scary don't you think.
Once, we had a mouse in our house, and it managed to bite a small hole through the bottom of my backpack and then eat the edges of my che...
she about to be ready. you still wanna come? or no.
Meeting with AFL-CIO yesterday was a success! Another partner against ALEC on August 5th!
All my btc lovely !
Nice crowd to be in. Thank you!!! #FF back to you. :-) Enjoy it.
aha how did u find it today?
If you love me, love me unconditional.
haha yeah I was so confused!!
Thanks for mentioning Martin! You are right about the quick links, we'll make them bigger soon!
33 point game for #OKC over
I lost faith in humanity when they cancelled Arrested Development (while According to Jim got like 8 seasons)
I tried to convince myself God was absent in my life. However when left to explain the miracles in my life, I felt His hand guiding me.
So I'm performing a musical this weekend. It's at Lakeside High School in Atlanta, GA. Wanna come? I'll buy your ticket! :)
I think you are so awesome!! Hugs to you Uncle Russ!!
how's u
Me: I can't do legal research for you. Patron: I'm not asking you to. Just tell me what the law is. Me: THAT IS LEGAL RESEARCH.
Trying to explain to what "stay gold" means...even after the movie!?!...
Choas in the morning everything should go find in the show
Look for the opportunities in the difficulties, not the difficulties in the opportunities. ~Victor Fiorelli
Man my imagination gets the best of me!
Tomorrow going to focus my efforts on finding solutions to some of the ISTV studio's needs.
nah, we'll see you next week! returns for
RT S/O to the bff for running a 2:04 tho! She out there doing her thang!
We're excited working on a new section of the website inspired by summer reading lists: The Reading Room.
Taking the good ol AFOQT, huh? I remember those days.
Hahah, I read this and was like, OMG. Is Rachel pregnant?! But then I read on. (;
ahh...didn't know that. Sounds like you have a problem then :/
I am neither especially clever nor especially gifted. I am only very, very curious. ~ Albert Einstein #quote RT
Game 7 @ the Garden tonight!!!! Go Rangers!!!
Study abroad in the summer? Interested in a scholarship? Click on the link to find out more info! www.iie.org/gilman
Meeting at work today. We started telling stories of where we were on 9/11, and we were actually able to start giggling a little about them!
Hello Nasty is trendin right now. Miss ya can't wait to be reuinited with ya
who's still up....
Ha! Watch you last nothing!
Thanks for the follows!
I love going to nice restaurants with him <3 .... only because the food be popping.
Goodbye Texas. Great seeing some new + familiar faces @ #sxsw. it was baller... Saw some awesome acts
im in the kitchen cookin
Album art concepts and design continue.
Guys can deff be hypocrites sometimes.. It's damn stressful
Out this lame ass school !
AUSTIN! Conference for 2 more days. Might need a HAT too.
lesson learned..lol
toast is more or less the only thing I've eaten for the past two weeks
i'll think about it :)
Top-of-the-Week Tip: Brave the Cold in This Chic Cape Styling Every week, mystyle staffers, readers, experts and stars offer their fave f
Next kids book my own love: Mordant's Wish by Valerie Coursen. Reading it at their school for Read Across Amer week. Charming. Fun.
One day Imma write a book..maybe 2 b/c I have a few stories to tell that are pretty interesting:)...
was here !
I imagine the kids picked out some real riveting films. Lol
their just trying to get their shot on mtvs "I got a baby's daddy"
That's so cool! Way to go!
Just got an email offering a discount on a "Titanic tribute cruise." Um, no thanks.
It is indeed! Spread the word :)
oh well, bad terms or ok? I'll invite him along
Dare I drive in wedges?!
Just saw #americanreunion! Nice way to wrap it up!
RT i don't think grief has a half-life I think it is always there, undiminished, and gets covered over by other experiences.
I've been thinking a lot about the kind of person I am, who I was, and want to be lately.. some things need to change.
- awesome! have a great trip! best question for vets from my perspective is, what advice do you have for a person my age?
you suck and are stupid but I love you always!!
Great show this morning performing for school groups visiting us at TSAC! Another one TOMORROW at 11am!
What kind of women would I be
What is the case for not bunting there? There must be one......
I'm going somewhere without having decided to go; that may be the only way I will go anywhere and even possibly find the unexpected.
I worry I won't see your face light up again!
yeah I'm back I'll see ya if you go to sams lol
And now and shall follow , because it is full of storytellers, and story loving folk.
Cheers to the (long) weekend!!!
There are some people I wisH I could bump my head and forget.
Oh no! I'm flying out of o'hare tonight for wedding! Did your flight get canceled because of weather?
Big signing today for the Niners, Ahmad Brooks is a beast.
Im sick my throat hurts pray for me!!
You OK? Heard you got twitter whipped by some Cheerleaders.
RT No less than 10 games potentially featuring #USMNT players in the World Cup conversation tomorrow, should be a great day
I couldn't take being that close to $6k, so upped my #ds106 kickstarter donation by 3$. ;-)
The Podcasts can't happen until I get the sound files from the radio station :(
So full from dinner!! #pho oosh. Need to shower and get back to work!
Why can't I post in DCUO forums? What is forums support email?
2day is the 1st day of the rest of my life.
Back at EWR and heading home
For orders put NX Order in the sub. line along with your order info for general info. or other inquiries put NX Inquiry in the sub. line
Very cool. I think I'm going on the 13th, but I live in Las Vegas, so I hope it does a long run and I can go often.
also dogs don't cook, clean or fuck me :/
Good morning!! Its Thursday what's going on in the city?
brilliant, Holmes! Tell me, in what school did you learn to be a detective? Elementary, my dear Watson...elementary
I already started on the first. I want it to be creepy ad then deep. Maybe I should try making it a chain thing
Can you modify playback speed? Re-encode video with 100x the frames, play at 100x speed. :-D
Damn this gym packed today
Working on my '90s-era thriller "The Girl With the Soup Dragons Tattoo."
Little people wanting to ban use of "midget". Said it's like the "N" word. Wrong. It's completely different. A midget can't kick my ass.
The best food in the world tonight, i have a special date at Big Bowl followed by the movie The Lucky One can't wait!
((Positive Vibes)) out to Mumbai after the earthquake!
thanks for a great time and great pizza!
What U.S.A city should FuNkY ProMotions start its first franchise in! Give your suggestions peeps! We are branching out!
😁 wish I knew you better
yes I'll post a pic!
:( its being raining a lot lately here now
lol thats weird. Must be the taste.
lmao only when you're making money.
2011 was a really great year. Besides many amazing things in my personal life, I had some awesome composing opportunities. Here's to 2012!
fam, we have the hardest time with RISP this season, idk why!
Those shots in the 1948 game have made my day.
you should play"Just In Love" ~Joe Jonas
Welcome to the team Seth Rich!!
Yoda is making so many friends in the city today.
fresh can of COPE long cut. #HAAN!
“: Every time I see a fat chick wearing purple, I automatically think of McDonald's Grimace.”
hate medemerge. if i get swine flu i'm gonna be pissed
Anthony reminds me of Vinny.
: ratmobiles, wiener schnitzel and the no-tech : I worry about this group loose in Milwaukee.
Don't go looking for truth on the internet.
thx hope we can help you in the future with some great hotel deals
Finally got my permit, & my mom let me drive home >:D
Ian Stewart and Reed Johnson homer, Cubs beat Brewers 8-2 to avoid sweep - Washington Post
why would that teacher make me leave when I been there for 45mins -___-
Class hasn't even started, and I can't wait to get out and eat some Whataburger. 4:50 can come faster, please!
Sometimes I just need a hug.
me either like WTF answer back Dan
Who wouldn't want to spend the night in a fantasy suite?
: Darien PL's circing ipads started out totally locked down. Based on patron requests, made them more open.
Every time I watch this is it, I with I could have seen michael Jackson live!
I divide all readers into two classes; those who read to remember and those who read to forget. William Lyon Phelps
I can feel it happening!!! Its a good karma day!!! YAAAY! I love these days!
Lifetime movies always show you a lesson and they ALWAYS involve situations about sex or breast cancer 😝
One of the Pirates of McKinley Lagoon just seized the 69th team spot! Who will take team #70?
You "cooled down" with ANOTHER run? Hard. Core. :)
How can weather reports say it "feels like 8 degrees"?Do they have someone stand outside and estimate what # they think it is?
I don't ever see any of ur tweets on twitter!!
It's not #FF but please check out our friend and please #follow!
It's almost 2 oclock, chea! How will I spend tmrw's off day.....hm???
Follow Me Plz? (:
I wish would stop stealing all my #sxsw tweets before I can tweet them. I'm just going to RT him all day.
Thanks Kelly! Not SF yet. Couldn't find anything, and Sabrina's thing fell thru. Hoping to try again soon though!
Groupon's first-quarter profit brings back some credibility
About to watch the girl with the dragon tattoo
Standing ovation of 800 people in tribute of Sen Byrd.
Problem: 1 Hungry. Problem 2: Lazy.
bombers eating a fabulisous chicken sandwich. Yes more yes yummy
Dreams are fulfilled only through action, not through endless planning to take action. -D.Schwartz
Michael J Fox on Regis and Kelly RIGHT NOW!
GO FOR IT.
I still need to find film for this throwback 90' Poloroids i got for a steal.I always wanted one but now its collecting dust.
so far so good!
Marcum worries: "how many digital special collections we've already lost"; scholars build resources abandoned after book pub.
We still have some great clothes in out 70% off sale! Come to the store and check it out!
Are any other organizations excited about March Madness? Or is just the
So Nebraska's coach thinks altitude only affects people when they're outside. Genius!
srsly tho I want the British D too so share the wealth.
I did not know they made black almish ppl!!!
Ah, the joys of conference planning. What fun would a day be without some type of crisis to deal with?
Goin for a run at midnight.. Hope I don't get shot👊
fuk the feds im tryna drown in dough
Teachers are so disrespectful , fuck that ! Ill be damned if i get disrespected adult or not #YEANIGGAIKNOW badass
Thanks so much for the mention!
Thank you Twitter, for being my new distraction. My eyes were hurting from all the "amazingness" at the other site.
what is?
was the French toast a one time thing?
doesn't help when you hit a guy batting .065 leadoff
happy bday Madonna, yes she is the best!
Reading David Hackett Fischer's Champlain. Up to Henry IV chapter. Just finished the St. Bartholemew's Day Massacre.
Excited for the walk tomorrow in San Diego. We raised $350, so grateful for generous friends and family! Hope it doesn't rain.
hey man i'm doing very good thanks. How are you? Lets work together again!
Vision is not enough, it must be combined with venture. It is not enough to stare up the steps. We must step up the stairs.....
great meeting you last weekend. Let's def keep in touch!
Sometimes the only sane answer to an insane world is insanity. - The X-Files
Did you ever get us tickets to a pirate game.?
Could you light a cigarette?
Playin Resident Evil goin to watch Kurt & Courtney!
All I do is miss you, and they way we used to be.
True that! RT #womencantresist a man who is intelligent....
So I got these dark navy boxers that look like shorts to take out trash / hang outside like no big deal. But weather is totally ruining it..
I don't figure it out until I was like 11
I have so much #LOVE that I want to give and express with that one Women but seems like I can't give it to her. Your Promoter Shocka Shock
Haha your tweets are too sincere. Thank you for the compliments :)
I'm getting "rugged" today. Check it out at ruggedmamiac.com!
This car is going to make me go crazy...and possibly bankrupt
S/O To My Follower
Steps to prevent the Titanic from sinking: 1. Name iPod "The Titanic" 2. Sync said iPod 3. Cancel syncing 4....
I am so not looking forward to that
Sweet find! Thanks :)
THAT'S WHAT I SAID
Grouplove-colours is a great song
hahahahahahahahah! How are you holding up? You are good!
for example, if you've got 3-4-5 coming up in the 8th, wouldn't it be better to use best reliever for biggest threat?
That's true.
just put kaya down to nap, so far she's staying there....crying loudly but staying in bed.....this just might work. =)
I see, thank you!
The best type of stretching is static stretching- a low, continuous stretch. This type of stretch is recommended for stretching exercises.
Hi, Kim! Glad to meet you!
omfg iim sick as a dog
are there projects you have in mind when you say that? I used to kinda be in that world, though a lot has changed since the 90s
Our freaking printer is a piece of crap ! It hasnt worked once on the first try since i've been home for school >.<
"Partnership exceeds any single project" thank you Lethbridge for presentation.
It's April the Heat gotta start picking it up
Looking for Summer Fun for the Kiddos? Here is a great way to have fun, with some education (shh we won't tell!)...
OMG plzz follow me or tweet I love your crew soo much I be giivng you love from Canada
sir yes sir
can you follow for me? still me different account.
U go to the store for a hershy go home with a star burst.!
WHEN YOU MAKE A TWEET JUSTIN BIEBER RELATED AND GET SPAMMED BY EGGS IN YOUR MENTION ABOUT HOW TO GET HIM TO FOLLOW YOU. LIKE NO. SIT.
you got it all cover
New Latin Media Guru Interview with Lance Rios (), founder and CEO of bit.ly/he7MK3
So, I shouldn't bring mine tomorrow? RT Dawkblitz: Saw 3 30 year old douche bottles w/ their gloves on. Why not put the eye black on too
not what i heard . & i dont have rennee fever . I have no fever .
January is almost done already. What's up with that.
what's really awkward is sitting next to your ex boyfriend and his new girlfriend during service.
I wud have left megan pretty ass on the curb cant stand a bougie broad money are most chicks motivation followed by looks/sex
Just watched Think Like A Man yesterday. Funniest movie I've seen in a while
Jake really is going in the Army?
aw :/ no they are touring in 2013 in the states next year though! And 2014. So please don't give up hope! :) so are BTR<3
Just scheduled my 15k mile service The miles add up and a year went by to fast.
New Single Pretty Straight!!
I love grapes
My one year old has started hating baths evidenced by her screaming the entire time. Any advice?
Appreciate the info !
Also look through YouTube; there are some great videos on SQL there. Let's see if I can find one…
a flat what now ? haha
Today turned out to be a very good day :)
I'll be sure to invite the kiddies at McDonald's as well.
I think I have a fear of nuns. I'll blame
In the emergency room with my lil diva
little fake bitches prancing around.. um no
still on the phone c:
"i cant have the music that loud right now, im too full.
thanks for the mention at the conf today, be passionate!
I swear, if #teamXtina wins tonight, I'm gonna be beyond pissed. They were NOT professional last night and lost all respect from me.
Best BBQ in Austin - Franklin BBQ East 11th.
only brilliant if they also include #pitusa and Call Me Maybe.
~I Can Noo Longer Worry About Wut U Doin N Who U Screwin Im On My WorkaHolic Shyt...#NoDayzOff..!
MT : A2 If I ever make it to Mitchell, SD, I'll be eating at the Depot b/c I heard of it via here
Stephen Bell references Kindle project with university textbooks at and Princeton- students gave it a thumbs down.
sweet let me know what you think of the new material!
BRUTUS: "Get you to bed again; it is not day. Is not to-morrow, boy, the ides of March?" (cc: )
her lil punk as self,love struck punk bitch ass dat im not FAT she not skinny her dam self nd she NEVER wil be too so STFU.!!
Wearing RED tomorrow on Equal Pay Day to symbolize how far women and minorities are "in the red" with their pay! www.pay-equity.org
Come on man...respect the process!
Religulous back on instant Netflix. #thereisaGod bill maher/silver fox
It's Not Fun Until The Ref Pulls Out A Red Card
I wish I could make YES into a bigger font
I've been saying it all year. One day will be a high draft pick for the NFL.
nothing to worry about. Like I said completely normal for 20 year olds to look at that kind of stuff.
Seriously?! Some people are jerks...
Somebody had to go..
RT : Are you ready for the Black Friday sale? We're talking rooms for $25 starting at 6am on 11/27!
Nothing ever starts in a state of completion.
I'm sorry been busy latly! D:
wow. she said yes... wasnt expecting that..
We got Johnny Wynn behind the controls and Jerome Bronson doing some instrumental
my body feels 60 not 31
thanks for the follow! :)
The bummer of an afternoon I was having is quickly turning around with the reappearance of sunshine. And music.
Tonight's dinner was brought to you by the incompetence of National Grid and the Halloween Nor'easter. Also known as: canned goods.
we're all bottomless.
This is a rollercoaster of a sports weekend. So many emotions.
HAving fun in ft Lauderdale
Never make eye contact when eating a banana.
Thanks for the mention, Rhonda!
I'm already mentally there lol
Dave Holland, "Critical Mass", The Leak.
she's wearing pearls?
hey u ever thought about flying . and how far you can go !
different world no doubt. This was very cool.
I think im scared of what the future holds
Derek: if u dont cut my arm off im going to cut your head off ~LOVE . BE AFRAID.~
MetroPCS begins data throttling for select plans
yam family
The inaugural #semtechbiz Berlin hasn't even officially started yet, but I've already had so many excellent conversations with (cont…
Nothing hurts more than not being able to trust someone you love and being stabbed in the back...
No1 txt mi or call mi bc my phone is done for good!!
First time having Dairy Queen. Mad good
What team do you want to win the #SuperBowl ??
parking garages creep me out a little bit...
Back from tour, back to work, practice tonight, gonna shake off the shit from this week.
Watching 16 and pregnant.. Actually one good kid on here & not another dickhead
Saw the Stahl/Chemosphere houses. Next, Eames/Gamble. Then, the Jetson house for packing & wishing I was moving into one of the former.
I'm so hungry but the kitchen is all the way next to me
“: Lazy sunday”. Math. Study. Finals.
FINALLY REMEMBERED THE PASSWORD! YES
I'm engaged to the love of my life! yayyyyy!!!!
You could have started your mother's day early by picking her up and taking her to the park and having a Mother Daughter/ Mother Son long
Let that nigga be too many niggas know about em and what not just let him fool these idiots! & oh that EP we got it on repeat !
I am for an art that is political-erotical-mystical, that does something other than sit on its ass in a museum. - Claes Oldenburg
Swag car
I never lie!
P.f. changs
why not
Rumor has it that Skullgirls will be making its debut at on tonights BSL stream. Tune in tonight people! 7:30PM PST!
what??? Must click and read now...
Listening to #f8. I hope Zuck doesn't turn out to be the villain people think he is b/c he'll soon have enough power to take over the world.
I'm picking up my drugs at CVS!
Follow for a DM...... can help a little with
Dad will be in town this evening for the weekend. I need to spend some time w/ family- overdue.
Lately everyone's like Hey Jelissa. An I'm like (•_•)....Then I realized I had up my government name on fb...
Thanks for following me...following you too!
Happy birthday love! :)
Lets start a national trend of #prankingDelilah. Any takers? Make sure you get past the screeners w/ something legit then let go crazy. : )
That moment u trip in ur heels during lunch rush hour...
it's a petty drive-by mentality to superficially scan something and trash it from afar...
Got my chip tooth fixed .. i was looking like Fabolous out here haha
No problem
oh and btw: happy birthday, celina. i love and miss you. nov 2003 & july 2004.
Check out this week’s journal on Clinical & Experimental Cardiology for a Trends in the Incidence Rates, Clinical Features, Treatment Pra…
hey little one how iz it going for yeah
and just Wrecked the #Fillmore313. It's 9:30.
Allerent Consulting Inc. We will be rolling out our new "Strategic Sales" product in the next few days. Stay Tuned!
I see that!
Out with my boy :))
Time to hit the gym!
why i am so tired tonight??
number 46 is so true!
Wow, what a day so far, I feel like a short order cook in the busiest restaruant in town. Hustle, hustle...HUSTLE! Anyways, back to work!
golf equipment
Quickest school day of the year so far
The Bell’s Rich Jones testifying now on HB 1075 re: Reinstating 6% limit on General Fund appropriations. We oppose it.
I need somebody to watch Hitch. Who's up on campus?
#ConfessionsAboutRelationships Good looks is for the pleasure of your eyes but inward beauty is what keeps you in love with them.
Ariana not follow me ! how r u?
Howie is so adorable
In need of something good to watch on Netflix instant play. Go.
Anybody want to give me Incubus tickets? No, nobody, really? yeah didn't think so, but it was worth a shot.
doh! Ha, well the weekend is nearly here.
The tattoo artist loves our design! Squee!!!
Interest rates for one-year ARMs exceeded those for 30-year fixed-rate mortgages over the last two weeks for the first time.
shit me too what you bout to get us?
While I'm at it, I'm assuming you are the same Ned from the Atomjack listserv back in the day?
^__^ Anyways, don't be a stranger :)
Just 4 mins for me. #problemslocalshave. But I am missing riding with
my pleasure
no stop that
I'll talk to u what up???
People really sending death threats to ticket master on my TL lmao
Have a Good Morning Everyone.
Mvt. 1 of an Organ Suite commissioned for our church's new pipe organ is shaping up nicely.
Well be posting a video update soon! Special thanks to Christian Gisondi who saved the day for us and will be playing bass at our next show!
Sorry to anyone who has to sit next to me for the next two hours in this class, bar smell.
FINALLY about to sit down to donate plasma, this process is long!!
...and then trip to to see Wozzeck, Griselda, Last Savage and year young artists in audition! Can't wait!
I can't tell u how #HOT its is 2day. Have u ever had that feeling like theres no wind just hotness all around!?!?!?!
I'm Concentrated
LOL this morning I DEFINITELY hated it!
no and follow me on tumblr:)
bruno latour and i have the same birthday
And I just sent that from the wrong account.
where da loud smokers at
I would wear my #LNYHBT Teeshirt in front of the U.S. Capital and get my picture taken for my Twitter icon/avatar and Facebook
Pauli D just said Britney's gonna kill it tonight just like she does on her tour!!!! That mean she's performing?????? :D
I so knew when he started to erase their names on the board that they'd crash. i'm a mind reader, what can i say.
You are welcome! Enjoy.
Mavs game with the best fiancé.
Happy Holidays, everyone at HQ!
watching last week's #MadMen again just because.
My mom doesn't want a mothers day preset she said she rather me wash all the clothes and clean my room! Haha!
John McCain almost president of the USA just boarded MY plane
watching my favorite show #marymary on
At #DevIgnition Code as Data as Code Clojure talk "Programs writing programs" sweet
Tired of trying. Sick of crying, Yea, outside I'm smiling, but inside I'm dying.
follow back
Nomming it up at Macaroni Grill... Italian doesn't get more authentic than this. *crickets*
it would have to be after Wednesday. But yes:)
5.27 laser-timed (bad knees)
“: thanks for the follow love” Dito girlie=)
Paul telling me about his trip to Ireland >
Tweet tweet tweet
baseball never ends between our two families. Justcantgetenough
Maybe they were bought out and upgrading before WSOP?
Back to hockey: What the hell? Marty and King Henry haven't blinked yet?
youll be asked hundered more times
if you say cray again I might slap you
Much thanx to and for developing the #envhist app to help us better connect to our #envhist--past, present, & future.
yes?? What can I do for you?
How far do you drive to and from job every day?
Holy crap! This game is so much fun and is killing me at the same time.
According to bathroom graffiti at a Mississippi gas station, both Sheena Easton and Stacey Q rock.
You change for two reasons, either you learn enough that you want to or you've been hurt enough that you have to.
since girls know what "buttaface" means, i'm just gonna say 'ugly head'
Sometimes, I revert to '90's rap. Tonight, it's "Too Legit to Quit".
I am going to the Labor Notes conference this weekend. They gave me a scholarship that covers travel, hotel & conference fees!
We're accepting nominations for our 40 under 40 Leaders of Today and Tomorrow. Send emails to for more information
no if victoria wrote u in spanish or english lol!!!
I hope today is the day that austin follows. I hope he notice this tweet.
Wolfgang Puck is at Los Angeles Ballet gala w/ his feast, and "Giselle" deserves this high glory. LA has ballet!
Florida/Georgia was amazing, I haven't been sober since Thursday, however now I am regretting it.
RT The weeknd puts me in a good mood.
not gonna lie and Idk if its on your menu anymore.. but I get cravings for that cucumber gimlet :)
Couldn't be happier to have him in my life.. Truly am thankful
why Chloe, he will see this and be slightly scared! I thought he was gay tbh, is he from ex facter? Get skype!!!!
I love this guru right here! > I am voting my ass off! Love her entry!!! she has the best one hands down!
Please is all mine!Thanks and enjoy!
Chelsea v Barcelona will determine whether it will be a great day or not.
#TeamFollowBack #WillFollow everyone back after work
Like horny teenagers in the woods, this is fucking intense. (Get it? Get it?)
commiting from memory, so I don't recall.
Sorry to hear that :( hope it gets better. Best of luck to you and your sons!
You don't have to wait for New Years to create new #goals and #resolutions for yourself. Start today!
I'm not even tryna toot my own horn, but I'm a handsome ass african that you should come check out at the darkroom this Sunday!!
RT : Its your 'imperfections' that are usually your talents & gifts. Embrace them.
Kids running around EVERYWHERE!!!!!
SVU is the show.
Hearing the learner/alumni stories always make me tear up. That is why we do what we do
better stop playing with me
Only in video games.
is packing up a Virginia state stone order for Occoneechee State Park gift shop.
As if tom brady couldn't get any gayer, hes now the spokesperson for UGG's for men!!! Secret homo
fish taco *ME
And alexis is cool, guys. Way cool.
oh...and wolski's...obviously
Wish niggas had a verified symbol in real life.
"I didnt think at all-I just said yes. Thats the sort of thing you do at 21, when the world is young and its challenges all look like gifts"
I hope attendees are familiar with and initiatives have much to offer in the way of leadership
Good Morning!
Tweet Me Numbers & i'll match you with a IB or an 1D member & i'll shuffle a song !
My wife just threatened to stop shaving if I don't shave my "beard". Time to see who gives first I guess. #gameon. Your move
Grunge for life.
I was not squealing! Gay-gasping, maybe. Squealing, no.
Watching Iron Man 2 isn't like having to eat brocolli or something else nasty. Its a fun movie.
"We all need some time to ourselves" . . Ha ! I don't !( : , well maybe sometimes . x ].
I am at the Madison area builders ass. Home Show. Everyone is signing up for a free quote from Weed Man Lawn Care!
Why thank you hillbilly for telling me to have a groovy day
Pauly D is 31. And will get skin cancer at 32.
Watching the #NFL Draft?
can't wait always good seeing you all battle
Deaf to bullshit, Blind to fake shit... My life, I'll be damned if I waste it.
Cant stand a liar!
You need to revise the Character style to "Keep with Next" so it doesn't break apart from the following Parenthetical or Dialogue.
u guys are so wrong! LBJ gets crucified because time and again he passes on big moments. Then when talking he makes excuses
used today to get jenkins-based windows test automation, it works well!
I'm obsessed with vintage needlework. Especially weird stuff.
and I love that you love her so much. I hate James Taylor though. Have fun!
Mickey Hart, of the Grateful Dead, chose 's Music Therapy Dept as a MKE organization whose mission is congruent w/ his vision of MT!
Pablo PicassoNo matter how hard you hug your money, it never hugs back
that sounds naughty
#Kodac is going bankrupt?!..I wanted the polaroid glasses..; (i honestly miss polaroid terribly)
Out-of-town beat writers love to depend on lazy archetypes, saves them a lot of time and energy. Still dumb.
Seeing things pretty clear now... A lot is changing.
I don't know why Bananas in Pajamas wore old man pajamas. They were young, hip bananas with bright futures.
These are some very good headphones
I have some tiny little pepper and tomato plants on the counter. will share:)
You may have afresh start any moment you choose, for this thing that we call 'failure' is not the falling down, but the staying down
Fuck it, Im on one.
why have i not seen you since you've moved here?
so excited for #glee tonight!!!!! ;) I want to see how Rachel's audition goes
Please Blog the response letter. :) I'd love to read it!
yes. MT : Okay.... It's time to make a maker space....A professional development studio. A space for unschool...Now. How?”
u better stick 2 it no junk n no 3asha!Shawty said y the hell u gonna get that when u have amazin legs!?She got a point loser
I spilled almond butter on my hoodie. MY ENTIRE WORLD IS CRUMBLING IN THE BLINK OF AN EYE.
Wrote a new Banger last nite wit the crew...truth b told something great is in the makings here...
Waiting for #oomf to tell me how i changed.
#FF We love you (and we love L-Z too, it's a space thing). xoxo!
"Always look on the bright side of life." - #MontyPython  #whistling 
Who will be at Mark Cuban's A-list party? An Entourage | Super Bowl XLV News - Sports News for Dallas, Texas
The Suns rock go Suns
Well night y'all
One security guard is back... Still nervous.
I was at my cousins baseball game and he hit a homerun then he came to home plate and blew his gf a kiss, preciouss!!!
Waiting for a client is better than them waiting for you.
Blazers Acting GM Chad Buchanan just said team may send mascot "Blaze the Trailcat" to the NBA Draft Lottery. I'm down with that.
Wednesday, I'm kicking your butt today. Get ready!
my bracket = sweet revenge beating in New Orleans in the final game.
Thanks for replying. I'm using the latest online desktop player w/the OnDemand function but it auto loops randomly during the day
Tonight on we talks w/ Ben Paul of then, panel discussion on Prop 19 failure. 6pm PT. www.thisweekin.com
RT : Was worried about identity theft, but the upside is, if someone steals my identity, I will know who to come looking for.
Wish I was on summer break. There would be nothing better than knowing I have nothing to do for 3 months.
Scott Buete and Max Ferdinand are working the Spring Break camp at Du Burns Arena today. Sagu and Mike Deasel are at FISC today.
1231 #amwriting words done for the night, and you didn't even know I was here, did you? Back tomorrow, kids! Off to enjoy some reading :)
Long night, havent gotten any sleep yet
just wanna smack a few people .... ur not worth more than that =]
“: I just wanna go to kennywood” agree
can you give a shout out to our Bengals wishing them luck on their STAAR tests? Thanks!
are me and stayin with u at george town?
Thinking about the impact of C. K Prahalad's work on design and co-creation.
Hard On Ah Nigga Blame It On My Last One!
Some people talk just to hear themselves talk, I talk To make a Valid point
link does not work sir
boo on still at work!
ONLY IF YOUR A TRUE FRIEND
Just when thought I couldn't love him or #TAL anymore, BAM! Amazing live event. #iraglass #thisamericanlife go see it Tuesday!
Mixtape is like Perfect to listen when u Boutta go Beat on a Nigga
when she's sick > 😂
Thanks! We will check it out.
Eat a protein packed breakfast. Digesting protien takes up to seven times more energy.
Sometimes, we wish we could just be paid in books.
hey guys..what are y'all plans for today and GOOD NEWS are whole group made honor roll 😊😊😊😊
Can't decide if this guy's look on the bus keeps saying to me "Yep you're attractive" or "Jesus are you staring at me again?"
I have homework for every class !!!! :(((
Today Was The 1st day Ive Ever Changed Outside Infront Of Everyone But U Kno What I Dont Care I Mean If Juice Went Everywhere U'd Do It Too
Frostbite tomorrow #excitedd #TERROROVERRISING #sosick i love the GARAGE
Hungover after karaoke awesomeness with and friends. There must be a next time sbny comrades!
Really? Lol like when your friend and his girl wanna go smewere and they invite you tlking about"It's gonna be fun!"
Why not mention the botched call at 1B that could've prolonged the inning? Way to go umpires with your human element.
We had a great family day today. lots of laughs and terrific times.
Random ass lock down while in the hall with Katie and Luis. :o
Good luck, man.
I think I've become obsessed with instagram.
Anyone want to see how bad a company FTD Flowers is? Check out their twitter timeline here: via
Getting sick :/
Today's Feature: Tuna nicoise salad w/ basil seared tuna strips, Truffled vegetables, asparagus tips, fingerling potatoes over mixed greens
Let's do a radio show today about your projects, your vision and your passion. What do you have availabl today to call in?
you beat the dream team?
Is this for real
And that was a waste of time. No good news at work either. Yikes. FML.
“: Lake Geneva, WI for the Mom's Day weekend! Chillin' with a Chilean Carmenere” Aww, my fave place to get away w/fam. Enjoy!
might not be able to make it tomorrow night- how early are you thinking?
DO YOU KNOW HOW MUCH MONEY U HAVE ,THEN UR BROKE LET ME SHOW U HOW TO GET PAID 5 TO 10,000 A MONTH BUT NOT IF UR LAZY
IPhone 4/4S CASES BUY ONE...GET ONE FREE! Buffalo/Rochester direct message me for details
For now.
": Do you think "I can rap really fast" is something I could put on my resume?" Obviously
Thanks. Loved the shrubs and flowerbeds one. Really fun!
If you think the real deals get done at Davos, you're not a journalist. You've been distracted by Switzerland.
TY RT : I admired ur passage of the huge gavel weeper wanted dont' back dn only 2 yrs till dems save the world
I respect ur opinion, but mine is they shouldn't have marijuana!!! It's easy enough to stay away from it!
Congratulations to The King's Council for putting on an excellent Spring Formal tonight!
Last day to try the Alabamy Sammy- buttermilk biscuit, crispy chicken, sausage gravy, fried egg. One of Dave's absolute, absolute favorites.
u can do it bro stick to it it was hard but i did it u can too.my moms like 56 and she did it some how..
thx for a great interview today. Sorry I couldn't make this trip w/ Jeremy, but I will be in NY for Webby Awards in May.
Spent 2 hours of my workday talking to a crazy person. Super productive.
Deloris - this time they blogged greed, avarice, covetousness, and cupidity
December is traditionally a bad month for writing. It's a month of Mondays. Mondays are not good writing days - Anne Lamott
Of course!:) Thanks for finding me on here! Great meeting you.
RT : The purpose of life is the expansion of happiness. YES! Thank you!!!
I love your imagines!<3
How many times have you been on a plane in your life? 1000+?
How can someone say they love someone if they don't love themselves?
Meandering the estuaries & the uncharted islands of the stream within the continent of my heart, vigilant of both savages and savage beauty
“: Chicago. Thank you.” no, thank YOU.
also teachers ability to manage tools and students to keep track of accounts- luv when google or FB sign in helps
God is good all my college bound players will be college players in the fall. football dream was answered by the head coach 🙏
a ginger coughed on me at the gym today, you can't catch the disease right?
happy mama means happy baby. Missing you!
what time will it land?
Thank you! Have a wonderful time at college! :)
Let me find some #BewVengers down for the cause lol ... Ive got 15 minutes to kill
Lost 100k in two levels in classic nutzho fashion. Got 32k going into 800/1600.
It's actually Monday now!
$2,000,000,000 price tag for Dodgers package (team, stadium, land). When is the break even date?
Haven't used Twitter in ages. Read "eating animals" by Foer. It was so good. Perfect pre-thanksgiving book
Hey there sweet tits.
Dinner date with at white castle haha #truelove ❤
Hope everyone is having a great weekend! For those who asked, here is the article by PJ Thomas on Qualitative vs quantitative research
KEY TO SUCCESS: Encourage co-workers to connect, collaborate & engage in new collaborative work practices.
yes, I'll be around for a #sxsw meetup!
I'm smart, funny, and good-looking. Of course you miss me.
Hanging out with Adanna & Karin in my day off. Loving this time
welcome to the community. Let us know if you have any questions.
um my friend does
back to backs are great.....
nothing much..wats up with u?
obviously cigarette breath! ....we like coffee breath!
Finally learning and accepting #Evernote. I've resisted this for a while…
“: If bloggers were a color, they'd be gold. Thank your #bloggers for their support, honesty, & love of #books” AMEN xoxo
Looks like the Boston Red Sox has a sexual predator problem just like the Catholic church!
#BelieveItOrNot Quaker Steak & Lube has the Best Wings in the USA.
that wat i said! But he said that some of the girls hv friends who parents r gay.
follow back.
Sometimes I hate to be negative but its LIFE!
Lol.. Immaturity? Check.
totally cool meeting you at the expo with ! Thanks for the chat and photo! Rock it tomorrow runners!
Glad we could help! Thanks for choosing to taxi with us! RT : Flash cab what would i do without you?
Time to train...
#thingsifrownupon Low grade weed,leen that ain't acky or hi tec,hypebeast shoe collectors,bum niggas an bitches,lousy rappers,fake people
Ray Davison brings me such joy and holiday cheer.
I wrote my name in the sand, that means I own it!
When it comes to diversity - look past gender... Culture, religion, perspectives are vastly different -
really? i had no idea :)
i need a real long vaca. ...i also need a serious nap when i get home. work 6-3.
Many complain about their appearance, and no one - on the brain.
gonna go to sleep now. Goodnight my beautiful followers <3
I think it's cus I'm always thinkin
fyi - you don't feel an earthquake when you are driving on the JFX.
I do odd things. It just happens. Not sure why. Then I over think it. I get over it soon enough. Till then....sigh.
Good Luck Cody!!
Can't wait to watch #entourage final season
just sometimes need easy things... and Smash is a vanilla pudding cup after rehearsal...
i love you UGLY! :) youll be the last to know if i died
Oh yea! 11pm and I just sat down with a nice big bowl of cereal.
he lives with us
Psalm 66:5 Come and see what God has done, his awesome deeds for mankind!
Defense finished laying out history of Butt's mental illness... DA is now refuting....
( YOU DID SO GOOD ON YOUR RAP)
I wanna go driving so bad!!! If only my dad would take me like he says he will :/
Ain't nothing wrong with that.
that was an accidental tweet. i keep subconsciously logging into this old twitter. follow my new one -
Michael....you don't know who you're toiling with, my dear!
Love doesn't fade away it finds a new home. So in other words you can't get over the person you love until you find someone else
can't blame the guys, the O's are ice skating uphill in the AL East. Their only hopes is a salary cap, or a division change.
Going to see play at The Dragonfly tonight!
Thank you for the #FF mentions!
The only part of you I wanna see is your back
"Your kiss a withered rose
Things that make you say hum.......When a family gets gov't help, it's welfare; when a business gets gov't help it's a bailout?
Do your users want hard copies of quick reference guides and books?
Couldn't agree more! RT “A person who has never owned a dog has missed a wonderful part of life.” - Bob Barker
Having an unexpected out makes the uncertainty of the future manageable.
Cause everyone looks like Jesus!! Ha!
really? I didn't know that.
#JulietAnUnPopular only has 24 likes on facebook. We need 30 to see the stats. Are there really not 6 people who will like it for me?!
I find it more annoying when people brag about not drinking or doing drugs than when people brag about doing it. But that's just me
similar to the way refs blew fouls on Wiscy Thursday, taking out in 8 minutes? Give and take! Give and take!
Was your little sister with you tonight?
I hate going to bed aggravated -__- ugh.
Getting ready for a great session on research methods at #AERA2012 some great presenters
yes, but Megan Fox was in a contact dispute, so she was replaced with a Japanese love doll. (same acting ability)
So glad you had an awesome time with your family, what you did over there was so heart touching...you're a BEAUTIFUL soul! Love u
what's fav iPad boom box app? I'm advocate of MusicMine
96% of graduates from private for-profit universities had student loans
none of you know stu the way I know stu, not you, not you, not you!!
That's a keeper!
thanks for following me Jess. Hope all is well with ya! Let's write one soon
Ok people,perspective. What happened in Norway is a tragedy, Amy Winehouse it's just sad.
Wiz brings the whole 'guys in khakis are sexy' to a whole nother level 😍😉
What I heard on the bus: "Stateville is not a brothel." Hahahahahah.
it's a multi purpose card, depending on which game you're playing i guess. kind of like her laptop doubles as a cash register.
She just realized what I was talking about. What other Macy's is there? -.- lol.
Way to go #Blackhawks! Huge overtime win!
why do you hate Catholics?
Birthday LOVE! HOORAY!
Time to change my pro pic, I've had it for like ever,(:
Three putt par your fucking kidding me
I got my man Paul George to win this dunk contest! #LetPGdunk!!!
is rocking my favorite shade of blue. I wonder what the color profile is for that shade? Is it cerulean?
He's one hit away from playing, and if on team last year, fans screaming for him to play. We just created our own Jets mess
Give George Lucas long enough, and he will make the Star Wars movies as good as H.R. Puffenstuff.
one of the best goals ive ever seen
Corey: Zimmerman must appear before a magistrate in Seminole County in the next 24 hours.
So..are you following it or not? (Oh my..I am getting really aggressive here lol )
Wow. Scary stuff right there.
Who knows places that are hiring ??
Yes! We're open on Veteran's Day - serving up our yummy breakfast from 8am - 2:45. $5 Bloody Marys & Mimosas...plus 22 local beers on tap!
Last Wed in April is International Guide Dog Day giving thanks to the services Guide Dogs provide to people who are blind...
Honestly, Justin's first tweet was like. "New to twitter but anyways buy my single One Time on myspace *link goes here* " LMAO
Thanks team for searching for the digital marketing definition, even if it does masquerade as activation marketing!
me. tomorrow. At the airport and on a plane. I am asking for a blanket.
You go, girls! RT : The ever amazing will match the first $500 in donations for & !...
Fun Dip! You are bringing back great mem'ries!
that's what I thought. :(
Yes... put your phone down and get to it! Be safe, Chris!
yo like my new name and check out my new youtube
Unlike everyone else in your life, waffles never judge you.
Support our friends!
come 2 miami and visit !
I'm ready for some Hawaii. Away we go!
Folks, Champions for Children''s tonight. Who is going? We'll have updates and more. Also follow #CFC. /
Thanks Tyler!
I'm addicted to #twitter updates!
Hey Said same about Wilson when first saw him in #Badgers drills. Release is high, quick. At 5-11, every little bit helps.
Happy birthday !😊
Glad you survived, dude. Get that gas during the daylight next time!
That's great to hear! Sorry we could not be there to check you out! We'll be in PGH this Saturday, w/2 NYC singers. Come!
We have changed our delivery rates!! We now charge only $3 flat rate for all orders!!! Retweet this to help out the Munchie Express!!
Recording, Playing, Shedding, Booking, Radio Show, Teaching, Repeat...
Hi cutie ;)
Tell me what you think of my new theme, Got it today. www.thepropertylover.com tweet me your opinion
so... i sould prolly change my team name this mornin... : \
even if i did have money i still wouldnt go wtf lol
OK, it seems to have worked. It recognized my Amazon purchase. Sorry for the trouble, I think the linking to the different types of..
Hard to believe the iPad only came out 2 yrs ago.
Democrats rally, change jacksonville, Don't be fooled by lies.
Matinee show TODAY at 2pm at Broadway Comedy Club - 318 West 53rd St. Last public show for a couple of weeks. Happy New Year to all!
Anyone else hoping for a Baha Men reunion tour?
Rock out autism tonight! Come down and show support @ nutty Irishman in farmingdale!
Jennette can u reply me I loved u ever since you were in The Inside!Please reply,follow,or retweet.
I need to stop buying things from , soon my house will look like my board. Good?
Join an online community. Provide them with valuable info & establish yourself as an expert.
guess what mr. #Ijever Much more talented then YOU are.. stop the talking!
I think #twitterlessmac should get us #Starbucks because I'm having a bad day.
Great day skating around the city,sign painting and now editing some photos !
ABC gives a full season order to REVENGE and SUBURGATORY - both of my favorites! Yippee!
best dream/tweet ever.
That's a complicated question to answer. How often do you see SMS-style language on a resume?
you can tell me everything i don't want to hear because as long as it's coming from you, i'll listen.
random LA party
I know right usually Dok is waking my ass up lol
"Your a big hockey fan and the L.A sharks Are your favorite team? Wtf?" answer from your canadian question... Oh, he mad
Join on Wed, March 7 for the launch of College Links, its pre-college program at at 7pm. RSVP at
killed it tonight very impressed
Two large boxes came into my office today, two small boxes went out.
Happiness is when what you think, what you say, and what you do are in harmony. ~ Mahatma Gandhi
OMG my life is over
you will get smacked real quick
Hey tweeters I'm sitting here listening to dynamite
And stuff
finishing up the set list for if you've got a request, get it in now. we're doing a bunch of originals and few covers
I just dominated family board game night by winning both Settlers of Catan and Ticket to Ride.
yay:) Jasmine tweeted me from her brothers page:)
lol you so crazy
marinated tofu in shaoshing, mirin, tamari, tangerine peel and star anise, and smoked it with cherry wood and tung ting oolong leaves
Former Anderson resident here...Only 42 & rainy here in Washington DC... Send those 60's east!
"All we hear is radio gaga"
Now Following & They are so freakin funny. FOLLOW THEM!!!!!
I advised friends to break engagement until they were actually ready and willing to get married. They did. Hope I was right...
I heard the wolf cry at the blue corn moon......
The African Students' Organization at American University has a twitter!
Alright Twitter World Goodnight!!!!!!
what kind of makeup brushes do you use??
The only pro player I have left, former Yankees farmhand Michael Gardner, has signed to pitch for the Rockland Boulders.
im very unpredictable and different so sumtimes im hard to figure out
well you might have. But since you moved to tx you've played with Alabama. And then u stole LSU from and lost wi dem
"Nice men marry dancers. Real men become dancers" ~Author Unkown~ Have a great week!! ;)
I am still painting flowers for you
EXCELLENT QUOTE!!
Ok Can't wait": girl. Love it. Wait till my show airs!! Err body will be tuned in! Move over Shonda Rhimes :)"
Bad news is you aren't here. Good news is i've thought of great new project for us to do together!
Q10 I love to make stuffed mushrooms, they are easy and always a big hit!
just horrible! what a tradition gone down for nonsense...famu band program!
whats up Soja? it seems like you dont know me no more.
Make sure to make your way to the Pittsburgh Cafe tonight for the first Slyder Night.
On our way to Houston
Maid in China.
As rain passed through, temps dropped from 67° to 60°. With some sun this afternoon we'll head towards near 80°
Ya watching the game? And ya get mad when I call him
no that is crazy.
Just upgraded and it was completely painless.
HOME. SWEET. HOME.
A happy wife is a happy life.
Why is everyone complaining? I love WestTest week.
I like your answer, m'dear. That could work for pretty much anything. :)
I read a book today. The kind that uses real paper!
thank you beautiful!
Was it Leslie Nielsen?
reasons the plumber should hurry up: I haven't showered since Mon, I wanna go to Brewed and purchase oatmeal, and I need to pee!
": "Those who say it cannot be done shouldnt interrupt the people doing it""
WHAT MORE FOLLOWERS FOLLOW ME & ILL FOLLOW BACK
Power outage in my neighborhood just as I'm headed out to lunch. Yay?
YOU CAN DO IT
..I've been let down, put down, n knocked down. but, here i stand..UP..
love you too. Goodnight. Besitos 😉😚❤
Who's 21+ and trying to hit up happy hour at game works this summer?
Welcome! RT : Hello Twitter! And they said it would never happen. Oh wait, that was me.
I'm scooping up the horse poo at the #Minnesota #Zoo for my dirty job! Tune into the !
u was laughing
RT : And now is tearing it up with The Rose. #fun #spectrum12 awesome heartfelt performance
Nice app. So the UI is all SVG with ? Icons look nice. Animation smooth. Small lag when I hit play.
Thanks for the mention!
Actually it's more like the golf course was on me.
The Great Cereal Massacre on W North Ave.
I'm late but just 1day so I'm not trippin
Niall <3 it looks so good!
yes i do!
Outta work flow...
Dear, kaylee! Hi (: we don't talk :( so you should tweet me or Dm me sometime! You
They mean it literally. Google's product will actually search out your Dropbox account and delete it.
What do you do when the only one who can make you stop crying is the one who is making you cry?
Teacher pensions have become too generous as teacher unions are smarter than school boards.
Michael Owen coming to MLS looks highly likely now that he's been let go by Manchester United
Only new bills... Call me the fresh prince
attempting to sleep.
love the bracket - Omaha would welcome Mizzou and KU as 1's (wisconsin as an 8 a bonus for me) - Creighton a 4 in Nashville
Kinda' depressed. I hate being in a place where you don't know what to do...:(
Help yourself before u ask for someone's else help!
Acting out what an octopus and a shrimp would say to each other if they were friends eating lunch. Our jobs are fun!
Happy to see you back!
How do i dye my natural dark hair naturally
I've really noticed the sound quality Improvement on app's HQ mode. Turn that on, people!
I don't know. They've got to want to change their lives. You can lead a horse to water...or was it an elephant?
OK, let me beta it, will give realistic, experienced feedback.
Every strike brings me closer to the next home run. Babe Ruth
yu already know what is it fam :)💙💙
Lately I have been working on a web-app that converts metric fuck-tons to Imperial measurement.
Ah, got it.
Ah, it's barely December, and the teevee is already prepping us for snOMG. Yay!
he is fuck crazy :)
Moving on is hard to do... but it's time to start taking care of myself again.
If "Death & life are in the power of the tongue..." have u thought about the death or life you've released by the words that you've spoken?
Retweet if you seen at least one of your followers NAKED.
All math and no art makes Julie a dull boy. Or something.
I've been getting bullied . And it hurts. Sometimes I feel like I'm all alone. I hate it. If I talk more about it I'll cry.
Can't sleep..working on two very large paintings..and watching the wonder years..lolololol
cause I didn't go no where
GoodMorning (Say It Back)
May have to wait til next year. Small window this year!
not sure #takeyourchildtoworkday includes 20 month old boys.
hell yea!
More heat towards the end of the week - maybe a lot more, especially east county. 70s/80s today - low 90s (at least) by Thursday.
Foo fighters were good!
I'm happy as a pig in shit
van is packed... tucson tomorrow night and then Gods Country.... oh shit
WHAT WAS THIS, A DARE?
My bad I missed your texts what's good
Awww thanks, love. I needed that.
vs Brock Lesnar in an extreme rules match. It's going to get ugly. Let's go Cena
It's still hot in #ATL, and it's Midnight
lmao girls and their obsessions with pro athletes SMH
Gettin on train so hectic
RT : A carefully bloused out t-shirt is a cry for help.
' chill bro that's my girl back the fuck off _ >_<
Wish u were here laying on top of me :-(
Twitter, I am being pulled in many directions. I want to keep writing, but we have dinner guests coming, and also Godfather 2 is on AMC.
burned 152 calories doing 19 minutes of "Bicycling, 12-14 mph, moderate (cycling, biking, bike riding)"
no sir. U know u my dog 4 lyfe kehd.
“: Suck a dick bitch” that's my line
#gaddafi #libya Ppl should get out of the house and clean up.
I'm having a very slow day, making up for a busy, late yesterday, getting ready for same tomorrow.
Just want to give a special birthday shout out to & . Enjoy your day girls ♥
When and sing to me<<<
And she has a really compelling first tweet.
sorry to hear that hang in there
im so sorry bc ALL mine alive even my favorite one
Guys don't make passes at girls who wear glasses.
Time for our little ones to suit up again. Our weekly SUN #basketball league tournament is about to start, 4-6pm at SEI - check them out!
I'm making chicken soup, hub made a big fire. hooked rug covering legs. Spring done unsprung. it's chilly here!
Sigh. Why is this even being discussed?
will you be my girlfriend
We're in!
TDM! Leveled up Assault Medic last night in TDM and now I'm ready to try Rush again :)
Dear nsa kids,which one of you is hooking me up with a graduation ticket?
If I didn't have my daughter, I could totally be one of those people that could be missing for weeks before anyone would notice.
Fantastic time at #WGBiz event last night w/ and rockstar
Any aspiring comedians out there? We hear gets wild with Monday Open Mic night, bring your game
Genius!!!!!! I love entrepreneurship!
What luck for rulers, that men do not think.
is told she has a dirty mind but appears all sweet and innocent
I like many things, including this. Sometimes that.
IT IS AWESOME! “: Improv as a metaphor for developing a PLN or PLC - Friends Baltimore #plpnetwork”
Great Skin Tip - Colorful summer fruit are loaded with antioxidants. Load up on any from the berry family for vibrant skin!
i wonder how long ima be limping around for
My beloved aunt died two and a half or three years ago and I remember them delivering her ashes in a tote bag from the f.h.
Tonight Jazz/Funk @ 8pm with Bryan...It's gonna be Wild!!
"I've never been shut down so many times in one night."
Which chavez??? RT : CHAVEZ Goes DEEP!!!!
gets 4! Great year for both leagues!
Thanks! They are also spending Xmas with us in Miami.
There is possibly no better feeling than sleeping on your own bed and eating a home-cooked meal
's 'fortune' album comes out soon WOOP:D
Gonna hop in the shower.
#SoConfused is right! ... Also strange is that we know what's going to be sold at Macy's, H&M, and Saks in the future. Trippy.
Dude. Great #skeptictank podcast with Steve Simeone. Really.
Looking forward to Black Thought 2.0 Conference tomorrow. Catching up on what I missed tonight thanks to twitter!
#FREE 1 Hour Group #Fitness Training today at our SOUTH location (1785 S 8th Street) at 11:30am - limited to first 8 (for members only).
Las Vegas, NV check out www.badsuerecords.com for more info
Darvish 91-95 mph FB, also slider, a couple of different curveballs and a split.
presenting at #CUE?
Im sure you are!! We need to get together soon!
freakin hysterical photo! Did you sample to fried gluten? Where was that?
It makes my panties wet when Taylor calls me daddy.
Great job!
“: #Chicago sports...thanks for the make-good. 4 games, 4 wins. #Cubs #Sox #Bulls #Hawks #Perfection”
oh dear Sam is going to jinks us!!
Looking forward to todays social media 101 panel at #uifall11 in #lax!
morning! It's on Fridays @ 11 am typically focuses on legal tech, social media BUT I want to branch out to more law related...
Never let anyone tell you that you cannot do something. If you believe and you try, you can do anything.
that is very for someone Angela's age. I ran the mile and two mile in track--ran the half mile occasionally too.
We are looking for a photographer for a shoot as well as for shows. We're interested in working with you. Follow
Would've been happier if trade up was for Cam Jordan or #Browns sat at 27 and took Carimi or Heyward. Jordan&Heyward more versatile in 4-3.
Happy Friday! Who's looking forward to working out this weekend?!
Crazy I still have feelings for you and we've never met
A nosebleed is a really crappy way to wakeup.
Go Pacers!!
GRIND HARD MEANS LATE NIGHTS .... LOOKING FO MUA'S, CLOTHING DESIGNERS, BODYPAINTERS, PHOTOGRAPHERS TO WORK WITH #DIRECT MESSAGE ME ASAP
Wife wanted to see Hungarian gypsy band so we traveled 120 miles to a 60 and over Russian New Year dinner.
Michael was able to do it :/
After track is over I'm hittin' that weight room hard beefin' up ! lol I can't go home lookin' like a "T" in my t-shirt ! LOL !
Social Media Campaign for Payday Loan Company Starts for USA ...
If you click on a pin then it'll take you to another page that shows the website where the item came from.
tell i said thats a lovely pic and i want some food send me some
Apr 4-6, 1932: Churchill was guest of King at Windsor Castle.
does this mean ill be seeing you at least twice a week from here on out? :)
Hawaii?! You lucky duck. Alright, sounds fantastic, have a fantastic time! PS- I'm so excited for haha
well done
no, just took a break. But im back!
Happy Earth Day! Try our Eco-Friendly soft waterbased inks.
Follow us on vimeo and we will follow you back! Vimeo.com/shadowleft
“: Getting ready for #cfblockparty one word Dubstep”// Excuse me while I scream..... #dubstep ❤
I've texted "oh shit" to my buddy like30 times tonight.
Transfixiated with our new son.
Hold up, will this dispel any rumors that Jack White and Johnny Depp are the same guy, or add fuel to the fire?
with this many runoffs pending (and them being late, in July this year) surprised I haven't heard more grumbling about 40% threshold
OK Game over. Chest palpitations easing :) Time to get my Cinco de Mayo game on...
S/o to ppl wit the name anisa: whether it's first or middle name no matter how it's spelled.
website has been submitted to GIS Directory on GIS Extensions Market
Glad to see I'm not the only one sweating
Praying for after the fire this morning. Just glad that no one was hurt!
I was born in Atlanta & calling your boss "Babe" on ANY day is not SOUTHERN. Seriously??? No one does that!!
Finally free from the Hunger Games. Finished book 3. Now I can get on with my life.
thanks Vicki! Love your profile picture! Must be interesting to be a radio host!
Got a lot done today, but still did not get my book order done. Sigh.
That's it, folks! If you are a #foodtruck and want to participate you will have to set up a booth. All food truck spots are FULL!
“: This fool is quoting the bible after he killed someone #AskScandal #Scandal” true politician
It's good to be alive. Good morning Twitter!!
thanks for the stalk lol
Much needed quality time with to be had today! And chocolate will be involved, at least for me.
We may have a designated Happy Hour, but really, isn't every hour here a Happy Hour? #ATXSushi #HappyHour 5-7
The devotion of thought to an honest achievement makes the achievement possible. - Mary Baker Eddy
I really don't like wearing shorts but I'm tired of being hot in this heat
Interesting approach to the #social work environment - new feature Workspaces that uses Live Feeds. Works with #iPad too.
hell yea it is.
Kona Brewing Co. (HawaiiNewsNow) - If you 're a beer drinker, specifically Longboard drinker, you 'll want to watch this! Kona Brewing Co
wish I could watch it
once the burner is fixed who else wants a cd besides
do you want money or power?
Then those are followers who don't matter. That's my opinion, anyway. I'll shut up now.
you guys ever pick up or is he still chillin with the truck drivers?
#HowLongZimmermanGoneLastInJail some of these are hysterical. "About as long as Favres first retirement" lmao!
aw u can kiss on me anytime lolx2 :-p
Thank you !
Go with your gut.
This bank person is sps stupid go work at a fast food place if u wanna be this stupid
needs to finish packing his camping equipment in time for his 0530 taxi tomorrow to fly off to Boston, then to #FRFF in the Berkshires.
So now a good day has turned awkward....
Never confuse a single defeat with a final defeat. ~ F. Scott Fitzgerald
And closes with the story of my life
Just nominated and for the i date awards... Good luck guy's...
Can't have my love any more
I love my family and friends there the only people I need on valentines day
The woman next to me at this coffee shop is freaking out about telling her parents she's dating a guy who's not rich. :/
I'll leave that to your sweetheart “ My ass is often worshipped. You can kiss it if you want.”
The last time I saw a face like yours I threw it a banana.
let's make it a goal for this year :D that'd be so great.
ATTN: hair styling producers, stay away from Chicago for your own good. You cannot beat Chicago wind!
Where's my bus?
- Little Caesar's on Goshen is now open, and it is oh so good.
that is a good one...
Agreed. Need a another source or two. I know we r supposed to attribute the sources but do we need a works cited pg?
Good morning!!(:(: Last #INDOOR competition for the season!! We gon go kill it!!(:(: <3 you all!!
My boyfriend snuck into my apartment while I was in SAL to leave me flowers for my birthday!
i left it ova my homeboi house
thanks!! Merry Christmas to You to! Thanks For everything :)
My yogurt has a warning on it "protect wildlife crush cup before disposal". i prefer "dont eat yogurt in the fucking woods".
Back to studying for ISSAP
Vengeance for that 1987 Game 7 championship game against the Sidekicks?
Zombies? Beach? 80s v. 90s? What is the most creative theme party you've ever hosted or attended?
At which you point, you became the babysitter, ? :)
I get around - TUPAC
Facebook became boring, & the layout is so different & confusing now. I also get overwhelmed from time to time & need a break. :)
will you discuss why obamacare is bad for country but good for Mass?
Don't say that too loudly; Pat McDonogh may have a heart attack.
Hey my tits are bouncing on the bus and I have the body of a middle aged lesbian so if anyone wants to get at this holla.
is online... Hi Harry!
#loweshatesmuslims you make me sick
Questions surrounding the ROI of social media makes me wonder if people understand what a captive audience is.
count me in that group as well... though last week it was super glue, not sauce.
"let's pretend Marshall Mathers never picked up a pen..." No Marshall, let's not.
good appointment. Only failures in an England shirt. Can relate. And will motivate. But feel free to hate him. Free country!
I just took 2 shots of NyQuil!! I'm ready to party!!!!!!!!!!
Woot stop in we are tweeting in as well RT : tweeting from Sweet Home Chicago!
Hard work is a two way street... U get back exactly wat u put in...
I feel so sick right now
heading to boston python meetup tonite, topic:
why isn't he in pajamas ???
Waiting for the delivery
that's it! Great food, wine, and views
Want your tracks played? Email us @ #TrackRekahz!!!!
You don't think exorcism is seen as weird? Because it is, "standard doctrine" or not.
Goodness! Poor Bates.
For context, I meant why am I wearing pants as opposed to shorts or a skirt. It's 80 deg in chgo rite now
BORED LIKE HELL plz talk to me people
Search well and be wise, nor believe that self-willed pride will ever be better than good counsel. - Aeschylus
Thanks for input. I really appreciate it.
are you listening to Brandon's radio show now?
too positive to be doubtful, too optimistic to be fearful, & too determined to be defeated! #NYR ;)
congrats on the article! you should be in show business, kid.
Exciting, spanking new news! Our feature film "The Exquisite Corpse Project" will be premiering in Hollywood at Dance With Films this May!!
homework on a sunday night...feels like I stepped back into a time machine to the good old days of
I agree except for the pill moment...
All of our various programs at our center are designed to build community.
i miss you. skype?
Dear Cincinnati, please learn how to drive in the rain. Love, Cincinnati.
Men are so slow *sigh
I PASSED YOUR HOUSE
Jan compared Mendeley to iTunes for functionality and then aggregated for collaboration.
IIm so glad...Jesus is Lord and we are NOT!
Portland pop-punk..?
lol is the homie Bryant still an A's fan? Or did he sell out like everyone else and join the Giants?
Love the outdoor furniture. So chic!
That site is HILARIOUS!!!!
Shampooing all my carpets...now I remember why I liked hardwood floors
At least it was Ervin Santana's own wild pitch that kept him from throwing a SCORELSS NO-HITTER. Pretty unique I must say.
Great day curbside today -- actually sold right off the table plus some action inside, too. Still need some food vendors -- cheap rates!
Quick and easy graphics, banners, you name it: Create in PowerPoint, "Save as" .jpg Who knew?
This Q&A was so active that it had to be cut off. How often does that happen! Pls feel free to send ?s, I'm doing dinner w/ Lyon & can ask
Can you like not do that
No offense to Beastie Boys fans but they joined Rock and Roll Hall of Fame before Rush? Rock and Roll Hall of Fame is now officially a JOKE
Thanks for the follow. Great organization!
Rivera is a clown, but we do need a TSA in the airports that actually works, and isn't just corrupt national security kabuki.
Great day for open house -sunshine, mostly clear skies, not much wind.
Me too! I changed my password hopefully that stops it.
BOOM! SO COOL!
Main thought? Chase picked a terrific market to deliver media about #innovation. Watch this space!
Be the girl you’d want your daughter to be. Be the girl you’d want your son to date. Be classy, anything but trashy.
what sort of "education"? RT : starting a technology focused NGO to help fight poverty & foster education in
go hewitt!
So I guess you won't "say 'cheese'"...RT Am currently so excited for the new imaging technology, I'm fasting.
In the U.S., there is, on average, three sex change operations per day.
12 year olds posting things like "I miss the good old days!"
How was everyone's Christmas?!! We are open regular hours today! Come by and keep the holiday cheer flowing!
"Every time you move forward in a society, there's a backlash to return to the status quo" - Jackson Katz
supports breast cancer eat this titties from the inside
im feeling so sexy tonite.
hey Ash! regarding CLA vitamins, they do help you lose fat but they might also raise your cholesterol. discuss w your doctor!
You know the woman wants her cowboy, like he wants his rodeo.
who wanna text , [ off my ipod ] RETWEET
I LOVE this Texas heat! Although it's too hot to really enjoy it but the few moments on our front porch is just enough for me:))
Can we get some free ones for suffering thru the Matt Killcullen and Ken McDonald eras?
I already miss reading postsecret with you.
Even if you don't have a Tumblr, you can still submit your soupy beard pics! Just email them to and include caption!
People thinking I'm being beat because of all these large ass bruises -.-
Avengers midnight showing!
Of course, as always: dames get sick during rehearsals, I get sick as soon as the show opens!!! Wah wah.
isn't it?! That one will stay with me always.. :)
It's going to be like a train wreck- you don't want to watch but you can't turn away.
Sure but is O planning Swift Boat-level attack on Bain? And you don't think it wld b undermined if O supporters trashed it?
Ur so sweet thanking all the fans in different countries <3
good one still a top 3 team in baseball easily
Writers, do you find it hard when creating new characters to not pull a little from people you know or even from parts of yourself?
Girl in my class gave me a whole thing of sour patch. NOM(:
When he smiles we smile! :)
English language learning via cell phone now available in #Tunisia! subscribers compose *136# to access Najja7ni free!
Why is it so cold.
Due to drought, there's a local ban on 4th of July fireworks. Oh, but how they underestimate a Mexican's determination to blow some shit up.
#TEDXsd11 was so good I just now stopped thinking about it long enough to tweet.
Listen in today at 11am at kcrlive.com! Topic of discussion: the good, the bad, the UGLY, breakups. You tweet, we discuss. #GetBlunted w us
At the 1st show of in NYC with this screening hosted by A great opening wkend begins!
I loved it tonight
My rule is to pick the kind with a cork in it.
My dog needs to chill the fuck out!!
sorry, may the Mavs fester in their own stool while being lashed by razor wire.
which video u uploading
Follow me for discounts on auto repair, oil changes in Oklahoma city. We come to your for a change
Kim Kardashian should star in the whore next door
boy u look good wont u back that ass UP, u a fine mofo wont u back that ass UP, call me big mama wont u back dat ass UP
Looking dance jobs in EU Star Now Article 19, Dance Europe, Dancers Pro, Foundation for Community Dance, London Dance://t.co/pbwaEFo6
Gee - all of his books are about situated learning. Games happen to be a good way to do that but are one approach only.
just saw Taken last night. Liam Neeson is a freakin' superhero.
I agree. I'm not a huge dairy consumer. A greek yogurt here and there. But the inflammation response is no good. So I stay clear.
Gift of Lights at the LV Motor Speedway, thru Jan 2. $10 specials M - W with clothing donation to Goodwill. See www.giftoflights.com
insane money...he needs to sign w/ a team fast so if he does pick Broncos they can bring back B.Lloyd
started a new blog about "life's crossroads" or journey www.crossroads33.blogspot.com
Anyone know the breakdown of % of Male vs Female coaches in Womens basketball at the College level? Just curious
yes I will! What about you?
you are a mean little girl
Interview number two is at two this afternoon.
In Walla Walla for Fall Release ! looking forward to a great weekend!
Pinterest provides inspiration
Gosh darn it... I just bought this... 2 pay... the Wind Blue it Off! :o
There is a gentleman in this restaurant that entered the World Whistling Competition and is now giving a demonstration. I'm impressed.
So these fucking retards infront of me are over here talking about how they do drugs -.- bitch nigga. You're 15 enjoy life don't fuck it up.
all TALENTED individuals u are welcome,"GET IN WHERE U FIT IN!" A 100% ENT. Are u model MATERIAL? ladies can u chew gum & walk a str8 line?
Babe Ruth once ate 24 hot dogs between games of a doubleheader.
ah or have u been RAPED??? Did ur girl rape ya???!!! Lmfao ;D
Want to win a solo ride w/ ? Enter the Ride with Lance Sweepstakes today at www.facebook.com/C2GoRideWLance!
When you can't stop think about this person, it's love ♥
Show us a pic of your "Monday Face"!
To me, Ryan Hollins getting playing time is a bigger story than the Celtics winning the series.
Many thanks for the RT!
It must be her luscious hair.
(And I *might* be eating them for breakfast today…a vegan cookie is practically a granola bar, right?)
tweeting u got me retweeted, I feel so used....thanks Maxx, and those that tweeted me!
ew good job
Just #Murdered that Geology exam
Have a book, author, or product you want to showcase? Affordable pricing. Email us a synopsis at .
The team is finishing up Mercedes Benz Fashion Week in NYC! So many great shows covered check them out at project-captured.com!
Geo Bellas: preserving e-data for trial in 21st century: think ESI, usu accompanied by metadata. Documents do not exist
Looks like it's not going to be a quiet Rosh Hoshanah this year. It was nice while it lasted. Shalom Alechaim! Yehi Ratson
#GiveObamaCreditFor... Facebook IPO. He'll take credit for it anyhow.
Hit up the Boom Boom Room tonight for 3 4 1 Miller tappers!
About to watch American reunion with my sister and Sean! Lololol making my last night in TX great :]
Has there ever been PG as good as Rondo who's as bad at FTs?
RT : nope only one class and it was canceled...and no work ah feels good lol-- ah u lucky... Get to slp in
The Philadelphia Eagles have tabbed Juan Castillo, the team's offensive line coach for the last 13 years, to be their defensive coordinator.
I miss my best friend
i don't collect no more all I got is Chicago 10s
see thats all i want! :D All my problems r solved
#Resnick, Blasphemy. 5 SFF short stories & 2 novelettes 1982-1999 explore religion & the nature of evil. Ultimately not very interesting.
Thought playing thriller during set break would be appropo
two adaptations in Tulsa, Providence at a uni in Montana, my first play Guernica at a uni in Illinois
Ready for bamboozle !!! New shirts
come to one of Brake Specialists Plus' 13 locations for your oil change! (512) 795-4066
we got 9 scores recorded for you (3eacz)
I see you tomorrow!
Check out music nuff said!
Lewis turned his back on Doan who didn't have time to react. Definitely a penalty, just not a 5 IMO.
LIve To Give Week 6 - Buy A Stranger Something at Random - www.LivenAndGiven.com This is Brian Zim.. Error: Please specify a URL to shorten.
Getting my hair did! Yay!!! :)
#MusicMonday worth checking: www.liverockyell.com www.thefive10.com www.isomediainc.com www.musicbusinessfordummies.com www.bobbaker.com
The road is so bumpy and if this driver don't slow down in throwing my phone to his head.
Yeah thanks, rub it in. RT and now oakland tied the game? YAY.
The rain is messing with the satellite feed of "The Voice". Bear with us!
total WIN! Did you purchase the Buckeye flavor as well?
that's a point i did not think they'd get. now try for the second one, eh?
Awesome is it a local or national show?
what were you doing over there?
Thanks for having my fellas!!
Playing Altar Bar tonight!!! Gonna be sick, pc4pc?!?!
Have y'all ever heard of this cat named ? The cat is jamming!
rad, will check it out
looking for a good music to listen too? check out Black Rebel Motorcycle Club (Official Page)... awesome !!!
one of my favorites is Hot Diggity Dog the history of the hot dog.
Had a nuts evening
or am I?
Having so much fun in English :/ thank god only 20 min left of this day
Full house for So Tonight! HA! HA! is up tomorrow. Come on out for the last week of shows at Theatre 54 at Shetler!
YES, sorry this one took a bit but hell yeah Ill never forget that one!
the best karaoke there is!
Happy mothers day to the niggas that gotta keep they girl in line lol
I want to hold the hand inside u..I want to take the breath thats true.. I look to u and I see nothing.. I look to u to see the truth
Don't get on da turnpike is bumper to bumper
are you real in voice
starting to watch misfits, good so far. too bad hulu has commercials every minutes. #fuck advertisments.
*raises hand* count me in! Though I'd like Delpo in too. & Ferru. Can we have then play dubs instead? and everyone get a prize?
#nowplaying "This Little Girl" by Cady Groves
RT : Right there with you! #ApartmentLife< Yesir, a house is on my first priority list next lol
The chefs are practicing now for the Culinary Olympics in Edmonton! is tweeting photos of the team in action.
What a betting menu today????
lol never it's just funny.
Ha! Beer 5, "I love you man, you're doing so awesome."
now that chritsmas is over i'm ready for a vacation :)
Minneapolis symphony orchestra...beautiful.
forever fascinated
Grew up in Tucson, Az. so worked at Rillito, Prescott, Az. Fairs, Boise and some at Los Alamitos. Many moons ago n 70s & 80s.
do you think hurrying to college damaged him?
hey stupid fucker you have called me 3 times in a row this morning and it sounds like your old ghetto phone is in your pocket!!!!
BEST show I have ever seen! It changed my life!!
spring valley
SO kind. BIG hope and hugs for you all, we had wonderful doc Dr Rizvi
You don't love a woman because she is beautiful, she is beautiful because you love her.
did ur account get hacked?
even better, post a video of meanie doing the cat daddy
everyone should acknowledge there city's brands. big ups to , , , ,
The Pleasure was mine madam, what other games are you into
Hahaha Jeremiah got a twitter.
whats miley cyrus is real user becouse every one is posing 4 miley and i hate it!!!!
Los Angeles fans: Be sure to check out the Philharmonic House of Design open until May 20th
I Alwayz Win
word . we gotta hit the club again soon . && i got some news to tell you !
Two girls wear the same shirt: "She copied my style!" Two guys wear the same shirt: "BRO!"
LOL I NO SUCKS BUT U BEEN OK
Had a great night with - Great performance & a wonderful dinner too! You. Are. Something. Special.
I love how seriously filmmakers are taken here in Thessaloniki. I feel important!
no worries
#weekend is here! I am outta here!
I love you Julian would you mind to follow me !
I feel so bad for Bryan LaHair. His self esteem must be shot since everyone always mentions how old he is before adding anything else.
hey got your direct what am i working on? a role playing game based website expressiaann.com (shameless plug :) )
Looks like I'm heading to Fremont tonight to see the offices. Anyone want to grab food before the rails meetup at 6:30?
Angels baseball in Anaheim, who's going? Go Angel's we need a win!!!
oh I'm very good at that! 8-)
Catching somone in the act... Priceless!!!
Watch for the Child Advocacy Center on WREG lunchtime news -- you CAN help prevent child sexual abuse!
RT : Internship opportunity! Social News This is paid + based in #NYC. If interested, ping me!
CGQ. University Park Golf Club. Urban Room. 7pm.
haha that's what I was thinking!
Tonight we are youngg
That's your story and I'm sticking with it, too! :-)
I NEED ME A FEMALE RAPPER TO BE DOWN FOR WCK RECORD FLATOUT!ENT A.D.S AND A-1 ENT. G.M.S
Sitting right in front of the fan. It's a hot weather!
You make me smile stay for a while
I can't be held responsible for what my blog gets drunk and does on youtube.
I found my #SleepNumber it is a serta
RT Theo Epstein speaks with 100 students from Agassiz Elementary School as part of the Citi Cubs Kids program.
Awesome, can he win some for me!
i swear, ever since bruno got his dog i've been haunted by the memories of my dog :'( good ole coco. i loved that girl so damn much.
awesome idea
at pretty cool party
still no phone. curbing the longest and sweetest to-do list ever. imissyou
I see +105 now as well ... let me check with HKC & Ill let you know.
Happy New Year to you too!! :-) It is going to be an amazing year!!!
Slamming WSP Fishwater as I come back into nola off 2 week trip. One of my fave traditions!
gumby doesn't walk -- he glides.
don't feel like going to stupid rehearsal tonight......;lajtoaiewh kill me
What do you think is the work productivity in Mexico currently is with them playing in the kick-off game of the World Cup?
neither did Coach K until 1991...or Gary Williams until 2002...or Roy Williams until 2005
32 days to SUPER BOWL XLVI! Special s/o to my Twitter favs who are making the run!
where do i do the questions jay
please lead the investigation into the refs who called today's game.
they let the homie out? lol
says it's tick season. Strip down and look around.
Have you checked out ? Follow for info on all our latest job opportunities!
Each day provides its own gifts. Marcus Aurelius
yeah man!!!
for everyone chatting with me() we blew my twitter up and they blocked me for a couple hours. i can respond in a bit! <3 you!
Worst day ever. Please go away, sickness.
I love Mover & Shaker season. Always inspires excitement and makes me realize how much there is to do. Go JP! Go Christian!
Got my tix for night of main event 2. See my boi n battle it out.
Safety bitches Hahahahahaha!!!
S/O to my followers you guys are AWESOME!!
- Thx 4 checking out & sharing the #SM piece today!
Cause honestly I just don't care
I'm heartless! And my past made me that way!
TEMPO Mentor Awards are Feb. 19 at The Pfister. Interested members and guests can register through Feb. 16 by calling (414) 905-0117.
Dumb ass insurance agent got my b-day wrong and tried to make me pay $300 more when I called to correct it. Time to hunt for insurance again
tweet tonight #wildwesley vote for your favorite dancers!
Keep getting invites to the Iota party tonight. Hmm…
Sit down tony lol RT : Tell Tony to
There are high school FED nerds. This may be dorkier than high school MUN nerds
Great bingo night for ! You guys rock.
I need 2 make my way back 2 Whiskey on Saturday's....I miss ur funny jokes lol :)
Hmm..Apparently J-lo and Cameron didn't listen to Edith.
Yay! Go you!
"what do you call an anorexic with a yeast infection? Quarter pounder w/ cheese" -John c. Reilly #cedarrapids I know that's bad but I lol'd
How to Hate , How to Love what's next How to be BiPolar
The one time I decide to use the "Educational Data Gathering & Evaluation" system, it's down.
wasnt even towards u smfh...but o well
Kudos Gamma Rho collegian , named Outstanding Panhellenic Junior at !
You certainly could help by getting FIOS in my area (11738) :) Been waiting and waiting...
No one tweets me *sigh*
okay Phillip Phillips just blow me away
I have a new account which I will use for my new book project
I am so excited, the tree in front of my bedroom window is going to grow pink cotton candy flowers!
It's poem in your pocket day! One 4 you:Keep writing your stuff/ Don't stop from defeat/ Rejections are rough/Makes success that more sweet!
Well. Id rather it that then the alternative. The day will fly by! FYI, dinner again soon? Catch up on Josh.... ?
Ugh, I can't sleep at all. Thanks to my inconsiderate ass brother!
I love 'The Kilogram'. Where can I find/buy it?
Attention every prankster ! Prank this number ! 7013173585 DO IT ! (RETWEET) , , ,
Carlos can fly. Damn
Couldn't be happier sitting where I'm at nowadays.
Time to stop pretending to watch this baseball game, and get to the gym. For Matt Harris's sake-- go Dodgers. :)
Yep, another good one. I have only seen the first season so I have a lot more to go but I like it
The true value of music lies in its ability to ignite social change.
that's probably why god gave you eyes
Just looked at the dates... Is SFJazz coming to Chicago anytime soon? I'd love to see you guys on tour!
Get your dad to put that game on a CD, boo<3
aw I'm sorry
Damn it
thanks for you follow me gonna be gift for me :)
Let's be honest. We're playing the side-stage before Gavin Degraw goes on. But still, come check us out on August 12th at Jones Beach.
well, be happy your not a Cleveland fan. In any fuckin sport
#WeirdFactAboutMe: I eat my food one item at a time.
Amen. RT : From the Opening 41 to closing with Two Step every song is utter perfection
Officially quit smoking as of today :)
OK, Sherlocks out there, answer the following: 1.What is Dudley's daddy's first name? 2. How many older brothers does Dudley have?
that's cool and all, but why are you wearing a deadgum bed sheet..? Haha :3
Yummy FOOD!!! Starving
They don't call me the Crew weather girl for nothing...
I love that I have the kind of job where I can actually be more effective with a buzz.
Just heard your name on Bravo! FAME
I'm watching tv :)
her forehead, it's a bit big, but, she's pretty in all the ways¡
#GoTribe Keep rolling Tribe!
Without ME, it's just AWESO.
It's impossible to be like EVERYONE else, but it's GREAT to be Christ like.
Totally wished Christopher Plumber was my grandpa.
So how about One Direction sold out MSG in one minute!!!!!!!!!:D
That... is so..... radical. Please tell me that's yours.
Follow my other account!!!
The same thing we do every night, —try to take over the world!
Note to self: put on an oven mit when grilling so a sudden breeze doesn't grill your fucking hand. Ouch.
That moment when you get a sweet text & you just sit there smiling at your screen like a weirdo..
cj exam. hour drive. then im gettin the heck outta dodge(:
and besides I will not be able to attend :O(, and it would be super narly to watch via mobile
Just like people, Zipcars get thirsty. Remember to leave them with at least 1/4 of gas or fill'er up for the next Zipster.
Good girls are just bad girls who don't get caught.
I'm also so sorry about your friend. Erin's grandmother kept smiling before she was scooped up to glory...I never forget it!
Wtf how did I not know was back on gh?! Yay
What song is stuck in your head?
I literally JUST left from there. Your turn. There's stuff to do here! Sometimes, when I'm bored, I walk to the library.
Anyone think for $20 a day, #MikeTyson would knock me the fuck out so I can actually get some sleep
a guy @ work say the Tigers were waiting all season 4 Prince to b @ bat with runners on base, I said the season is 2 hrs old
new book Adaptation is a science fiction homage to the TV show The X-Factor #lbyrpreview out in Sept.
Put on Narciso Rodriguez's new perfume & now I smell like a nursing home.
doo it then.. it sounds quite yummy.
Taking my students on a tour of some of my deals-in-progress today to learn first-hand how to renovate a house for max profit.
Linking boosts insight
lets make some hits! Hahah, have you started yet?
A part of me will always love you
Will do!
At chuckie cheese
ya but I dont get on it
you are so talented and really pretty! Please follow me? Thanks :)
Smart kids that smoke weed..HONOR ROLL.
thanks for the follow Jason!
loved the American remake of the Swedish film #TheGirlwiththeDragonTattoo directed by David Fincher. What a great film! Beautifully done.
That sounds lovely. (tea, not coffee, tho)
lol SHE WAS
you're straight I'm sure everyone at that school knows who you are already anyway :)
Just saw the Domino's musical. amazing!!!
that be great. I've been saving lp mailers too. thanks!
Wish we could that everyday >>
~~ Read Tip 2/7 ~~ Techniques to maximize the effect of statistics part 2: Pause immediately before the statistic to create suspense.
Granted, in the 70's food quality was on the decline and had been on the decline
it's the little things in life that amuse the hell out me.
the classic megamans are the best do not go wrong brother
worst monday morning including no ipass, no coffee, so late. acheived nothing cuz the computer shut off during original cataloging project
thanks for reaching out. I am not actively looking for new ventures as I have my hands full with FounderSync. Thanks.
Great to hear, same w/me, thanks! :) RT : everything is good I hope everything going good for you
by eight and that's how tall your
Christmas is here, am I the only one who's family watches " A Christmas Story" Non-stop..?
Lyrics off the chain always
phone dropped one too many times. On the plus side it's an indirect upgrade since my crap's too old!
There's nothing like being a voter in #Ohio on #SuperTuesday! Let's see how this circus ends tonight.
thanks all my ICM501 peeps for the badge endorsements. Reply if I can help you out! (Comment strings are tough on my eyes ;)
I'd be shot if I did that RT : Been in the shower over an hour
I got one of those, too, when I started a new job. Didn't find it helpful. Different staff = different experience with students.
we saw ya Ronnie...in the elevator..
sweet dreams :)
Do you reset your evaluations after earnings, or do trends carry over?
Welcome to on for live b'cast 12-2 today. Swing by if you're nearby.
And you get what you earn, not what you desire.
is dat rite
they sold out about 1/3 of Rupp in few hours, Rupp wouldn't have sold out but would have probly pushed 20k.
First-class endodontics in 3-D
Girl. Yes. Also I owe you an email.
you can see the light then so can I a good visual for me to have 2mmorrow on the rad bed. Btw agreed on RT of every mention lol!
You really don't get anything.. I trusted you as my friend once and look at you STILL. Seriously, just stop Olivia.
let's all go! Richardsons tonight at 7
My son breaking his toys because his birthday coming up what a mess its all electronics this year for his education so break away..
Just sent our first direct deposit payout to one of our venues. Huzzah! If you're a venue processing credit cards we'll be in touch SOON.
The awkward moment when u get a text from weird number sayin stop textin and u look up n the teach is laughing like how u get my number hoe
Time to let go and move forward....
how hairy will that sexy chest get if you didn't shave?
What a great day and wild ride it's been for former Augusta State golfer Patrick Reed, -6 today at Quail Hollow, hear from him on WJBF at 11
well I mean if you were on that iPhone swag you could facetime me.
please don't put a scorpion in my bed & say it was to "start a debate"
Ew I hate you omfg have fun w/ your bitches. I feel bad for the next bitch that has to deal with you. #
Come join in the #FishFry fun tonight! Gotta love that beer battered and baked cod!
i never said that..
Pick-Up line: HEY CUPCAKE!! I bet you taste really sweet.
Would be pleased to show it to you at GDC. I'm speaking on Monday. Are you free Thursday night?
RT IF YOU WISH YOU COULD MEET THE ICONIC BOYZ.
R.I.P Dick Clark...you were such an amazing man and will be missed.
Just did another 481 words. If I keep this up, I just might make today's goal.
ah crap, SAVES THE DAY - "stay what you are" is still good.
#ReplaceSongNameWithDeruler Heart break Deruler (heart break hotel)
I am back in the 910.
woohh! I can't wait. (:
Thank you boo 💙 see ya later if I go with jazz 💚
I've asked Allah to send the reward for all good that I've done in my life to my parents, yet their right over me remains -Dr Abdul Hayy (R)
The Silk Tie likes Chris! Do fashion designers wear ties? thesilktie.com
No. And YES.
no wait i know what gwapo means and i'm from NY...
Probably a bad sign if you spend most of your life powering through things.
I'm not that cool :'c I'm a loser Lmfao xD.
Library Assistant (Technical Services) Opportunity in Los Angeles area! Email me at !
Seriously...very strange.
has anyone ever told you that you're really hot & have an angelic voice ? just wondering. wanna share a cheese brocollli soup?
Win a 32GB Iphone
soon! we are shooting for midsummer. Come see us at M!
Whoa. Just realized I started at five years ago today.
#goodlord Bauhaus Coffee is bumping like it's a club right now. Choosing this spot to work at was a BAD IDEA. #turnitdown !!!!
Why does DHL keep calling me? I gave them my address, isn't it their job to find said address?
The show "Too Young to Kill," which featured an interview with yours truly, will air on E!: Feb 3 at 9pm, Feb 5 at 5pm, and Feb 6, 7, and 8
My Tuscan-vegetable-clean-out-the-fridge soup was luscious. I wish I had eaten more of it.
I'm ok with it.
Also, I will not have regular access to a computer when I return this one to my boss.
So tired, working the late shift & opening the next day sux:(
Thanks bro!!
If you don't know TED, you don't know shit! Go to: www.ted.com It's simply amazing!
Dave, I'd love to hear more about your DC moving plans. Any idea where/what you are looking for? I'd be happy to help you out.
Taking a cab to church -_-
How do you like Rainmaker?
You blind me with your beauty and I never dare to have a doubt.
Join us 2nite as we kick off the 2011 season w/ the vs @ 5 & the vs the … Read more
Yes, I'm the Casting Director for the show- I hire all the actors that speak. And yes, it will be awesome!
re tsa: "it's an anagram. Neat, huh?" Then move along as they try to puzzle it out.
Wish she would act her age
Plan a good outfit or make tea...only have time for one...
Old ass men in there 30's need to stop trying to talk to me!
it's a kinda day.
Happy Birthday! I hope you have had a great day! :-)
One lab left then
i will Get sleepy, Lay Down and Never Fall Asleep
Good morning beauts and gents!!
No, Apple didn't make a mistake. But, this means we still have about a year of iPhone 5 rumors to tough out, haha.
thanks for the follow. Can you see the line for franchising chocolate?
awww okay<3 yew so coot
Tofu, or "bean curd," has been consumed since the 10th Century in China. Any favorite tofu recipes?
No, I just loved it. The ones I'm directing will be shot/released in the coming weeks...
jw are you ever gonna tweet again
When you perform the trapeze without a safety net, you are bound succeed because failure isn't an option.
I'll add you. I'll be on pretty much all tonight.
There is still time to book a great holiday party! Contact your favorite property for more infomration and availability.
Gotta love McDonald's shamrock shakes!
Fishing bound crazy lol mad early
Basically, Billy G made him play point guard when he shouldn't have been. I actually thought he got a raw deal from the fans.
I didn't know old men used Twitter Rick!
If I were a gun I'd be a nail gun 'cause I just NAILED it!
True that Joe and Erick tend to over do it a little on the plate. Great for leftovers though. Thanks for sending her our way!
Got a drink in my cup and I don't give a fuck
Thanks for the follow man! Dig your stuff!
Thanks for your tweet - I love the Bristol - wonderful food, great atmosphere!
Very cool Jennifer you look great on the Talk have fun!!
Dear who ever is reading this, I hope that you know you're never alone, and someone out there loves you more than you can ever know.
follow me,I LOVE YOU,
lol I was not referring to you #dontstressit RT : I don't have the clap Moron
wait do you work at pick n save?
Can't wait to sit down w a cup of tea and bask in 's latest post on the women of surrealism, m.
RT : My clients have called me a star - & I'm an iPhone dev. Does that qualify? :D <- U following me yet?
yes please! DM me and let's hit up downtown tomorrow during the day hopefully it won't rain
good morning back kittie... love watching you on cam.. great day ahead
Did you know #foodallergy can be deadly?Epinephrine is a LIFE SAVING medication! I carry two epi-pens at ALL times for my
I'm here!
In need of a new place
I think I've had Musashi's but I can't remember. So obvs it's not that great. Tokyo is my fav. But they close at 9.
Special needs students benefiting frm virtual ed 2 personalize learning. Join the webinar bit.ly/specl_needs
Don't forget about #CincodeMayo tomorrow! How will you be celebrating? With a barbecue & margaritas?
I WOULD DIE
I figured you would like this RT : Yes! 3 FarmVille notifications!
last time I checked it was only cuatro de mayo. I'm out. sticking to the hood. will i see you out tomorrow?
Is going to get kicky new glasses today. This pleases me.
NewVantage Partners Announces Upcoming Big Data Thought-Leadership Events - MarketWatch (press release)
Shoebox already lets you share on both Twitter and FBook! You can also use via 1000memories.com if you don't have an iPhone. :)
bored you?
i hate school. period. bu i HAVE to go to college or im screwed
It's #TacoTuesday!!! Where are you getting your grub on today?
If you ever want to watch The Human Centipede........... Don't!!!!
Aw is taller than ^_^
just talked to Freda. She really wants us to marry a Jew. Don't let her down!
Let them guns blam bitch you know I am , letter guns blam this a 44. Bulldog it does not jam
Since it's looking like a sunny day outside, let's discuss sunglasses today! Do you rock aviators? Oversized? Colored ones?
Good advice! Thanks!
i followed :( but i would have appreciated a shout-out =(
Hey ! Will and I see you tonight?
No Chit''lol
When people don't text back<
Really sad! Someone hacked into my blog site and now I can't access any of my old posts!
When prospects say "Your price is too high", repeat back "Our price is too high?" and wait for a reply. Useful info will follow.
be brave i will be praying for you and Bella !!!
I need to meet - I need her. It's just that simple
carrots in peanut butter are not like sea salt vinegar potato chips AT ALL.
S/O to the beautiful
YAWN!I should be back in bed, but I'm Punishing myself for not noticing my baby girl was feverish&sleepless most the night ☹
wish i was back in ATL... columbia missouri has no social events
Come on
Oh yeah Nebraska !
How much is it in Atlanta?
is an email address I can send something to you guys?
Any tornado sightings?
love you too girl.. you need to text me when you come in!
Rock on, guys. Cheers!
Uh.... Who is at buffalo wild wings pushin that button?!!!
hey, great station. how about showing a LI girl some luv with a play or two? ;)
Coo coo .
it's funny how girls with curly hair want to straighten it and girls with straight hair want to curl it haha
Centennial's priorities are all fucked up! You care about people stealing, skipping and smoking. But don't care about threatening lives?
the faces I make... Omfg
I know someone like that..yet I'm over here being sweet and I'm ignored most of the time..
Hahahahahaha good one!
Adding Pirate Radio to the list of favorite films. For music lovers, it is a must see!
how was tonight show?
LAST THING THE HOMIE SAID TO ME WAS WE RISKTAKERS WE GET MONEY FAST AND WE GO ALL OUT❕❕ HE SAY YOU SEE IT GET IT ❕
Watching a movie with my boyfriend & brother in-law :-)
- Cool, sounds good. 7:30p $$ for the field. ;)
Yep! I figured out the issue, Cole will take care of it. Did you post that by using the twitter button on the app?
wed or thur night is good for me. We have to get together.
We are pleased to announce the launch of the new website for Dianna Duran Secretary of State 2010. www.diannaduran2010.com.
#HappyEaster (In a small child's voice) I just came to say, thank the Lord for Easter Sunday!
Congratulations on your award. Much deserved!
#ChampagneThursday is just around the corner. Where/How will you celebrate?
I was told I need to tweet more.
you tell them, we may be quiet but they know what's up.
#shoutoutto money money money
you're the worst movie ever.
Too much like right....
media education foundation - we have the same distributor, that's where I came across jdi
Facebook platform going open source, please opensocial die
A-Gon gonna beat Cano in the #HRDerby. Yankees suck! Let's go, Red Sox!
into the car wash we go.. I hope we don't die. :/
I am literally crying laughing at #newgirl .
sorry bruh lol...had to call her out about the opusX
I got so much shit on my mind it's unbelievable
Hey, thanks again for the call today. I really appreciate your input & advice.
Miss my hubby
I want my chinese food!!!!!!
you are killing it with this tour! I was right next to the stage in anaheim and loved every second!!! Follow me!? Xoxo
That moment of anxiety while your waiting for him to reply, especially when it's a huge question.. :/
i had three cups of lemonade [!<(O_o)>?]
What's your favorite part about the holiday season?
My dad hasn't been able to hula hoop his whole life and has decided to boycott #Walmart Hahaha
Kills me that people will fire down and energy drink and fast food then say how an all natural #wiredwaffle sounds unhealthy.
Is anyone going to be talking about journalists signing recall petitions at the #uwethics conference?
Weekday Lunch Specials - $7.95: SoLo Pizza & House Salad, Chicken Caesar Salad, Spaghetti & Meatballs 0r The Parmesan Chicken Sandwich :)
This horror.. The perfect ending.
I Cut alot of Ppl Off And It's Feels Good Not To be Around Ppl and They Bullshit!!
. Not sure I thought of myself as a "leader." Thought of myself as an apprentice.
that's weird as fuck. U think he's telling the truth? That's fucked up.man
what makes a cupcake "thoughtful"?? ;)
red album is hard as fuuuccckkk! Keep that boom goin son!
(2/2) of the docters that his arm is fucked up and he thinks he has torn something. So now he is injured. <EXTREME RULES 12>
thanks for the RT ... we are in the potters hands:)
GRIND TIME!
Today is a great day to be outside. Would you rather be at or ?
these vibes are everywhere
lol I've been pretty good just can't sleep so I got on twitter X) I gotta be up in 3 hours xD haha so how you been?
: CP3 just gave your boy Tony Allen the biz...
; Mine is broken ):
Fearless is having fears. Fearless is having doubts-Lots of them. To me, Fearless is living in spite of those things scare you to death.
yeah yeah :)that put childress team in 1st for sadler and 2nd for dillion in point because james and brad are not fulltime
Mwahahah had a full on, unspoken blinking contest with some guy on the train. I WON
Like! Thanks for the fun times on Monday.
I don't think I want to live in a world where LinkedIn actually can have an influence on someone's professional success.
no rain. All sun. #toeontheline?
Careful XO, my inbox is flooded w/your indiscretions at Hayride. AFriedman, blacked out BEFORE getting on the bus? Senior transport? Uh oh..
Its a great benefit concert with lots of great local bands.
Oh that typo was gross. *who, not and
I agree, it makes me happy as well. Thanks so much!
Something going on pretty much every weekend until August. Let the summer madness begin!
Most times, use "to". "Too" means also/a lot. "Two" means one more than one.
YES. love dat song.
I don't think I've had this many near heart attacks since football season
Anybody home? I was enjoying your tweets! Hope all is well!
Having lots of stuff will not make you happy. Doing lots of stuff may.
Have you winterized your bike?
Why does everyone ask me if my husband is black?? Lol
I hate being tired
What a beautiful day!!! Come on ouit to Cowtippers and check out our daily specials! $Pinnacle Martinis and $5 House Mooritas...
The more people I follow on Twitter, the less I read from any one of them. This is a business model?
Everyone's a little more friendly on St. Patty's Day!
I've worn a black shirt everyday this week.
so, same number? Mrs I can't text anybody.
I wish i could rewind it bck
Kay. so I can either delete this account or give it to somebody else. does anybody want this account?
MEE!!!! :D that would be amazing!
Time is priceless. You can't own it, you can use it. You can spend it. But you can't keep it. Once you've lost it you can never get it back.
#10RandomThingsAboutMe I like alot of girls
Can't wait to go to the gym tomorrow. Hopefully im not as sore as I was today, tomorrow.
gah I love it! Right back at ya retard!
Why he just lie like that?
Shut up. I hate you. I had toast and instant coffee.
the main things you want to try and avoid are saturated fats, trans-fats, radiated foods, and processed foods.
The glasses you see are for decoration only, won't find water here!
better leave them dice alone
Exciting time of year
thanks for the tweet Andi!
Thanks for the follow!
It seems like I'm at that part of the night where I think about my life, direction, boys and music and try to decipher where it's going.
Madonna sang 3 songs with choirs, a matching band, and 3 other recording artists. Eastwood said "it's halftime" and totally dominated.
I will thanx :)
I wish this car radio would work
#cnnnye ;appy new year and peace for everyone
We are serving up our famous Texas Cheese Steak special today at Memphis Minnie's BBQ Joint! See you soon
Today's Specials at Emerald City Catering and Take Out: 50 Cent Wings
sorry it wasn't the VdeC. But damn, I love the Seco. But not as much as I love you too. XO
I'm hungry & upset not a good combo .
Q4 I refused to move for a job, but I was also willing to be more flexible in position/library type.
Hey Austin
i got ya...U got to come get it tho
thanks josh! tell some people, will ya? have a great one.
Webisode audition today...Time to Lock In!!
I am looking for a good affordable #acupuncturist in NYC, any suggestions?
sometimes when I lie to u.....its not to hurt u...its just cuz I don't wanna get in trouble
Actual forgetting would be as bad as the doing. "Forgetting" is just repulsive politics.
Thanks for checking us out! It means a lot!
All of a sudden we're left looking at ourselves in wonder of who or what we are turning into.
Welcome Larry..
Tomorrow night we celebrate the birthday of my good friend and aspiring house dj and producer Gonna be crazy!
Done with youtube and xbox
loll pussy smh -.-
lol aite, and a rain dance, if that's cool xP
Thanks, Cindy! :-) Have a blessed day!
You know, I honestly thought this #Julia everyone was talking about was the "composite" girlfriend of #Obama from his autobiography. Sorta.
I put my 2 weeks in at my job.
But University is more than about football
REALLY THO LOOK AT THAT PICTURE. JUST LOOK AT IT.
Hmm... Who wants to work with me!? :-) Have an opening.
if he wouldn't of ran, nothing would of happened or if it did zim would be in jail right now.
So true! It knows if we still need that validation and passes it on if that's where we're at. Love the TUT link - thank you!
Who would really want to be every man's dream?? You only get lusted after and not sought after.. -___-
The boys who you can have an on going conversation with al day and never get bord :)
not textin the guy u like at all cause u dont have his numbr
i<33 u soo much and todays my bday and it would be completely amazing& mean so much if u could wish me a happy bday
With 18 genres on ReverbNation, why does 'Comedy' has the fewest participants? Does this cheapen my reign as #1 comedy musician? Comments?
Just read your blog about what you learned! Great stuff! You will be missed! And thank you for supporting ! <3
HOLLA AT ME BOO HOLLA AT ME BABY
Drinkin' some Skinny Water! Trying to get work done before the game!
Life is like an onion: You peel it off one layer at a time, and sometimes you weep
Hot weather in April = lady with her own lawn chair laying out in a bikini in front of the downtown library.
lol its cool you know how our phones get
Did you spell cum wrong?
Just left a gallery showing in North Hollywood with some friends. Saw some odd paintings, hippies and a few sunburnt mothers.
I miss
haha tectonic plates stuck in ur head
killing....a bottle.
I feel bad for the patriots owner though...
Dude, I keep saying that too! Following a pastor is ratings gold! But I'm thinking it would be cooler to follow
no dead animals, it's good karma
I have a baseball hit by E5 that gave my fiancé a ass bruise during BP at Camden yards. What's your bid?!
PLACES in our downtown gallery tonight, come by now for a glass of wine. Istanbul & Libre Commune at 7--come dive in!
RT IF YOU LOVE "MY CHEMICAL ROMANCE"...
You know you are a #DecArts nerd when you critique ballroom furnishings @ a wedding reception. (Is that a repro Federal inlaid side table?)
Pumped for in Vegas this weekend! Excited to see to see the DB guru Greg Brown.
glad you like our T's. Be sure to follow us so you can be entered in the win-a-shirt draw...
Better tv? LCD or LED? What would you buy?
Kiss Coffee will be closed today and tomorrow--Merry Christmas
you were at work
Why do I say yes to work on my day off whatever its been awhile since I worked an event at Soldier Field should be fun
Zimmerman was not drug tested b/c it was a cover up sadly. Understand Tray's fam frustration, but what can be done?
Swimming starts tomorrow
Sorry. I was hacked. I didn't send the message. I've changed my password. Hope you don't get more junk from me.
every Saturday now through March 17, except Christmas and New Year's Eves. 9 to noon. City Center, Rangeline - City Center Dr.
Always on the grind every day, every night with and
“: “: #ThingsThatPissGirlsOff guys. RT” no just you” you <3 me
Since when has Alex Jones' website been considered a reliable source?
Saucy Saturday! Spice Up your Look! #Salon Full Mens #Barber Shoe Shine $75 #weave #braids #FlatIron Color Specialist. #Oakland 5108321100!
we are good. Thanks for the offer tho
you don't understand how much I love this picture.
What to do...what to do...
My tutee is having trouble staying focused on the materials, due to personal problems. How do you keep students focused?
The new iPad's retina display: not impressed
jose preciado @ swtwtr authority is your biz partner? He's also officer?
Check out and follow for our daily dose of undead and horror news, reviews, videos, previews and much more!
That's how I read it.
HOW AMAZING, right?! obsessed. can't wait for more movies :)
Not a safety?
"end user services". Isn't it interesting that customers/users always seem to be put the end?
I have had a headache for over 12 hours! UGH!! Praying that I sleep it off!!!
WOW! That's bad. How did they get hired?
@ the end of the yr i'm thankful for all the positive ppl who hav supported or helped me in my life.
Taking shots !!!
We usually have bumper stickers and t-shirts at shows. We open American Falls on the 25th.
"You have to consume literature if you want to make it" Diana Son, playwright, speaking to our students for our arts festival.
Aww man no more ? :(
Class time
dance recital thing, performing in three dances uhh -.-
Gus Johnson is very happy Stokley coming back to Denver
Just finshed a photoshoot today it was amazing took alot of pictures of my hair today and got folowed by a celeb today,on twitter
Everybody RT the club follow
c Karen Lang hahaha.
#cyclechic: discovered that my vintage #isseymiyake jumpsuit paired w/ #rosherun kicks are perfect for warm weather urban
THX…Your up either very early or up very late. I guess this is normal for people from the land that birthed StarBucks
she said that too
no u don't
hahahah what did you get done?
Why is it so cold out!? Keeping sane - just walked to ballet class. Second paper is nearly finished.
let me know how it is...
Another useless law. Unless we put bullies infront of a Jury of their peers having such useless laws do the victems no good
congrats to and - the once and future new media directors for
I've had men before, he's just one more
I see money everywhere... ¥€$
They're hunting for bloggers using location and timezone searches. If others become 'Iranians' it becomes much harder to find them.
Mirko Pasta- Toco Hills The Masters is ON all week at the wine bar, come enjoy HALF OFF all beer & wine watch this timeless tradition.
Yeah, what a bunch of weirdos, with their imaginations, sense of wonder, and love for fiction and art.
Umbrellas are a death trap for tall people in NYC when it rains... There should be a PSA about that. "Short? Please lower your umbrella."
I see this everywhere in 2012. "Nothing in the world is more dangerous than a sincere ignorance & conscientious stupidity." MLK
Leebron: What if universities had emerged as for-profit institutions? What would higher ed look like today?
you'll have to let me know what you think after seeing this mom's situation. #Evicted It's on tomorrow night.
Thanks for the follow!
No problem. We all go through those phases.
LL Bean's "Boot mobile" was on Boston Common this weekend. AMC was delighted to participate. LL Bean is celebrating its 100th Anniversary!
Lost both games
I need sleep.
Segura: How would we pick people to put them on a committee? How would that committee reach consensus?
I know its ridiculously amazing!!
Sports Illustrated wants folks to choose its next cover - I say it should feature me and my couch
I'm so nervous aslfksf
"It does not take much strength to do things, but it requires great strength to decide on what to do."
lol no problem glad. Everything went well!!!
. i had been putting it off, so glad it's done! Cheap, too bc she's a friend of a friend.
Happy Founder's Day #KappaAlphaPsi!!!
That nigga Blake is a dman monster he just fucked gasol up wtf was he thinking
Gonna nap a bit, then gym…going to this huge family party tonight.
Yo , your followers are freakin me out.
sour cream and onion chips dipped in maynaise. Hahaha
Yeah I know. Lol! (:
Yes. And I have minions.
It was great seeing you too.
it's called companionship. The dogs love the rides and tourist love them--or most---not you.
Love the show but it's a bit weird when you address guys who call in as "honey". Maybe a Tennessee thing?
We are! See you there :)
Thanks:) RT happy mothers day sweetie .
I would love one!! #FollowMeAriana <3
I think I know the LSU plan to deal with What poor losers
Best part of the Halloween 5K at Disney is enjoying the Epcot International Food And Wine Festival after
Maybe we'll run into you at Magnolia Thunderpussy?
! tell you women i NEED to see her !
I haven't.
Can't wait to watch Demi & Britney on the X Factor! :D So exciting!
There are no traffic jams along the extra mile. -Roger Staubach
As a hardcore g33k I have to thank you guys and tell you keep forging ahead. No challenge great program/GUI.
In the past we've gone to the Claddagh downtown on wednesdays at 8, but we've been talking about finding a new bar
Can't sleep. Not surprising.
I am currently running bespoke personal training sessions for just £20! Call 0208 940 5577 or private message me and book yours now!
I get to be a Country singer tonight! If you wanna hear some live Country music in Brooklyn, head to the Branded Saloon!
Aww Thx Manny. She was really sweet.
RT : Want to earn some extra money??? We are looking for guest bloggers for our online nursing community. Interested? email...
Q: Russians have sig naval bases in Syria on the Med Sea. Do we need to twist Russias arm if Turks are go for change in Syria?
Don't fucking K me.
of course it wasnt scary for u!!! its ur favorite ride dip shitt!!!
I love BVB they are awesome in every angle ...
oh well just ignore it and hang out with better people
So excited to start contributing to ! Geek power!
RT Why do people thank people for following them? Isn't twitter about following people?
A woman just gave me $2 so that I could ride the bus and not be late for class.
he should creep on this convo. This is the good stuff
Dear people, if you are not wearing any clothes in your profile pics - do not follow me please!
Valentines day is in 2 weeks & the only thing I love is my dog............
We'd like to welcome all our musician and geek friends back from #sxsw. Now come get some copies! We're bored!
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs.- William Shakespeare
Xocai gains 128% in mlmrankings. See what it's all about! W.myxocai.com/71376
Man, this mexican has me laughing for days. #sofunny. ;D
We are so excited to welcome Greg Clancy of the to coach us this weekend at our annual retreat!
my traps are sore as fuck from tuesday :s
Boosie found guilty on three charges of unlawful facial similarity to Flavor Flav
I didn't know
I've always heard of it referred to as "black hat," but "black cat" sounds more vicious. :)
It's a great day filled with potential.
???? Just laying here thinking ? ???
To make your life count for something, forget about the failures of the past and focus on the opportunities of today.
twitter is lame AF lol everybody cares about them selves
Okay, no more telling you who is winning! But keep telling people about the contest! I'll be checking!
Thanx ;p I'm pretty fond of them myself lol
Salute to PLUR
We make realities out of our dreams and dreams out of our realities. We are the dreamers of the dream. - Roald Dahl
If there's nothing missing in my life, then why do these tears come at night?
😍 RT : so obsessed with
C'moon, give me specifics. Tell me all about how attractive this student is. *rubs hands together, leers*
Currently hiring IT Business Analysts in multiple industries! Let me know if you're looking to make a
Some of it is a function of what I calling the tinkling ice in the highball glass syndrome
CANT WAIT TILL I JOIN MY OVERDUE FAM
"If at first you don't succeed, redefine success"
? Vick, A. Johnson, CJ2K, Blount, Moreno. Must keep three. Vick, Johnson and CJ2k? Only ask cuz of possible hold out of CJ2K.
Commission meeting in session. Watch live at www.wedrawthelines.ca.gov
018 is the virt one to get to #EMCCA, 918 is the ITaaS one to get to #EMCCAe. Know anyone who's taken it? Hints wanted
ur great comical relief
Had a good night out with the boys. Mad fun.
hot fire
Marquee erectors required May 2012 and dates throughout the summer. Previous experience helpful but not essential 01636 701702
"The reptilian wisdom of Yankeedom"
You can use KeyMetric to optimize Microsoft adCenter campaigns by seeing which keywords are generating conversions and phone calls.
Good intro? It must grab my attention & keep it: questions; stories; cold, hard facts--but write in THIRD person (for now)
Happy New Year!
Happy Thanksgiving! Hope you all enjoy the time with friends & family!
yelp let's you use yr phone's gps 2 search what you're looking 4 & read members reviews of said places.
um, no. But so cool because it was a complete surprise
But they also choose fascinating topics I wouldn't have necessarily thought of. Up today: case study on Victorian gift books.
I'd be pretty happy with Michael Floyd.
you're almost here man. It's already 80 and clear skies
needed Shaq and the refs. They all have a history of losing.
Just accidentally triggered Dashboard for the first time in years. Forgot that was still a thing.
O.o you listen to that song?
Because it was blocked by republicans. If they had gotten anything done it would look good for the Democrats.
Really enjoyed your final mock. Good trades for MIN and BUF. Would be shocked if Kuechly fell that far though.
absolutely love it and have recommended it for my team and others at work.
heading to Agent Provocateur today and finally buying the underwear I deserve.
Oh, that is the easies! He digs me. Call this done.
You almost don't believe what you're seeing.... Is it bad to hope that it's the real mom and kid?
Sick af & don't feel like dressing up today so I'm wearing sweats . Fck it.
Hallelujah! RT : I love my sat Mornings they are dedicated to loyal older women who tip well 😘💰🙏👏👏👏💋
That's what I'm talking about :)
welcome to Twitter Betty Ann. A particular challenge for US Givens. 140 characters or less;)
need to find my next project.
Good morning, everyone!
Neither. There was probably a fee-for-art requirement. Developers like bronze statues of children & cultural icons
Tomorrow the 20th ● Taste of Africa, 6pm – 8pm @ Vandy Cabaret Room. Experience and enjoy food from different African countries!
Link is giving us "oops..." bloody beavers!
#Vikings pull highway robbery on #Browns just for one spot. Wow. Cleveland really is getting paranoid about Trent Richardson.
Jeanie Ward, author and 10 year breast cancer "thriver," delivers a well-written "eye opening" article after her own urgent eye doctor...
Time to hit the pool!
PLEASE , FOLLOW ME (:
now all u need is that mini bar to be free
the weather is crazy if your hot and we're cold. freaky!
Best of you - foo fighters
get it homie!!
Absolutely. DM me your email, we can look at some home games.
Mortensen remains lodged in Goodell's butt.
Christmas in July. Present arrives on a jetplane :)
are you watching the #Grammys?
^_^ hope your surgery goes okay!
I want those oysters! Happy Florida-ing! Wish you were a few more miles inland :)
“: Summer nights, Everybody's feelin' sexy. #RascalFlatts”
+1000 I think the offices should have bunk desks. We'd have so much more room for activities!
Sales are on and both and are down.
1) Your tweets are awesome 2) Everyone knows the *real* 3rd line is, "Petrified elephant feet " ;)
to all you lovely vintage hounds who've been anxiously awaiting our 1st major unveiling, 100+ pieces going online next week!
You hate people in general.
Something Positive Comes Out Of Every Negative. Mine Came At The Perfect Time.
Wow!! Hey super star!!! Americas One woman News crew!! Wrecking Mad-Town with the latest breaking News!!! #awsome!!
yeah, i liked how canter (a friend) was so matter-of-fact...i've always felt that way...esp after reading his book
Movie marathon while writing my senior paper 😒
i'm slightly annoyed now .
At the Museum of American Art's gamer symphony orchestra. Packed. Cosplayers. Lots of older people who might have misunderstood the theme.
you don't follow me xx
Easy to be the best distributor when we have amazing partners like yourselves!
I guess it does make me more grateful for all our good ones :)
Birthday on May 17th just wish had a concert!
The Main Event.
#emiertmw12 want to get involved in your organization? join committee to plan our 30th anniv event in anaheim
I always love when I say goodbye to a bride at the end of the night, her hair and makeup looks just as good as when I started
S/O to all of our followers! We have great opportunities coming for y'all soon!
#New website coming soon!
like legit I would if I could
heard u were going to b at MSU....u get #hangovers right? Want some samples of our all-natural hangover supplement??
If you can't shoot a man in cold blood on a public street, next they'll make us all buy broccoli.
#gwu this week can be stressful trying to finalize your schedule but come in and try the Cuban sandwich at
A man's face is his autobiography. A woman's face is her work of fiction. ~ Oscar Wilde
Come party with me for my bday tonight!! Love yaa!
I always see my self smile now u should always smile just for me.
Fun day at NCMP today
yes, taking one for the team ;-)
research shows that grades do down when the team does well.
Great meeting you IRL yesterday. Look fwd to more collab!
a part of my soul was demolished when that building came down. Pouring out a fire sauce packet for TBell's ghost
Congrats on the success. It's all well deserved. What site will you be writing for now?
You and I might be the only people in America who can say that.
Here we go boys #flyers time
I can't wait for #Believe Boyfriend is amazing! Proud of you #Belieber 83
why not? in one sense it&#39;s the cruelest thing possible but he feelings wow! the power of love lol can you connect with me on im sti…
I just wanna sleep . .
hmm?... well im here in class and somthing is going on n there not telling me wat can it be?... /:
T It Forward - a suggestion from PGA. Great idea! Makes golf more fun for a large number golfers. Any comments?
Agreed! Let's make it fabulous RT : Another day, another chance to make a difference!
I'd love to read a copy when it's 'share ready' as I like to say.
the fact she says hurtful things though just makes me love them more, if that's even possible.
Damn he wont me on twitter nomore..
Alright. Tomorrow's classroom experiment will be using for during-reading Scholar Check-ins
Really touching story, Eric. Thanks for sharing.
you know what that means, bad news for the rest of the league.
I finally got a chance to watch this -- it is fantastic and quite VOLUMINATING. ;)
Good luck; hope it's productive. ^SM
Uhm, can you guys say TOMORROW?! and <-- Have fun today! :D
Every #child has a light inside themselves that needs to be turned on!
again, thanks so much, I appreciate it!
i just did for the first time. too dope. hes a good comedian too
So does anybody wanna take me to playlist live? :D
I remember kindergarten where you actually got to do things, not like today. Now that's graduate school. - Alan Kay
good morning...im currently tired as fuck;)
Happy Monday everyone! What are your plans for the 4th of July? Click "Like" if you will be serving our Crisps at your party!
Glad you could join us!
Independence is happiness. — Susan B. Anthony
My four-year old has a "magic sorry"-replete with Doug Henning hand gestures)-that he claims is enough to make up for any indiscretion.
Best part about #Avengers is that the aircraft they flew looks like Serenity.
Cinthia and Nick
Percy calls the POTUS & threatens to set off a nuclear explosion unless his demands are met = #Nikita is ALL NEW TONIGHT at 8/7c!
Ohh..... Well tell Rachel that's nasty.
#Literature class with my favorite prof. Let's see how this goes 😝📖
Oh yes, that's so great to hear! We love that kids love our restaurant!! Which location do you all usually visit?
We'll have a bike corral again :) RT : Can't wait to ride my new bike to the You bet I'll be there on May 19!
If I called you a boob, would you hold it against me?
port au prince Pink Motorbike - Kiss ! :P
i need followers people follow me who are big fans of chloe moretz!
Freaky that it's almost April already! Where does that sweet time go?
Heyy Can You Follow Me??(:
Thanks for bringing her in!! Happy Birthday to her!
Cintolo: "In Judge Wolf’s courtroom two and two always adds up to four ... You will see that the evidence adds up to not guilty."
Just looked over finances for the past few months... turns out I'm single-handedly keeping Shell gas stations and Starbucks in business.
I want a Kings/Rangers #StanleyCupFinal. NY vs LA... CANT WAIT!!!
Staying afloat? Yep, sounds like Southside to me.
Drinking at the bar. Played Jumper by Third Eye Blind. One of my most fav songs.
Follow , that dude knows sports. And he’s good looking. We’re not just saying that bc he’s our CEO. (OK, we are, but whatever).
just buy Little Debbie and make it easy on yourself.
there should be birthday party and we should provide the cake!
U guys did great on a very bet Christmas love u guys
Applications to audition for #LastComicStanding are due TODAY at 4pm!
Thinking about my pre-grad school job helps me stay positive about my current job.
Do Any Of #WildcatsInMotion Got My Phone.? lol Can I Have My Shit.??
RT I'm the kid who could be a lot smarter if I applied myself.
Who should you see for jaw pain? primary doctor, EENT specialist or dentist?
Have a great weekend everybody.. Remember, pick up a pair of 67 boots for the holidays! They make a great gift :)
Finally got to watch He asked for more. :-)
Ok maybe weeding all of the P's was a bit ambitious for my lady few weeks at UDC...
Nice! RT 5th largest crowd in Carrier Dome history for this game vs. Louisville!
The North Korean everyone loves to hate has died today at 70. Too bad he got to live that long. Honor his death by watching Team America.
#TigerBeatLovesASW All The Way!!!
Watching glee from the very beginning :) :)
Nourez I'm more found of the PS3 exclusives and I'm not a fan of the social aspect of the 360
Whoa! Wish I was down there to run into them!
Yeah Bitch
Going to teach myself CAD
I assume it was Tommy H?
I hella just woke up frm a two hour nap
I have to say #Pinterest is a mess. I keep trying, it keeps f'n up. I might be done w this mess.
Look. I'm a Directioner. I don't need a quiz to prove that I am.
Locks frozen here at work this morning. Hot coffee opened the first one. Propane torch for the rest.
Mac Race! (via )
Modern Fam tonight makes me wanna go back to Disneyland
today was a good day :-) now im off to bed.
Leaving work early to catch flight means missing 's infamous "grown up" pinata filled w/ candy & small plastic bottles of booze.
i'll be watching the game on ESPN3 while working the front desk at the Lon Morris library.
feeling good this morning.hope all have a blessed day
"I'm going to do everything i can to stop it right here in the senate...that's not what this country stands for."
:D my cousin so made my day!
hahahahaha that's me
Oh darn, mine is too small:( Maybe next time around:)
Loved seeing you talk about the Pacers and saying they will win tonight! GO PACERS
Advice is what we ask for when we already know the answer but wish we didn't. - Erica Jong
.-+.+- THE CRUNKEST PARTY ON A SATURDAY NIGHT SEE THE PICTURES --> WWW.G1PARTY.COM
Thanks! You were the first to alert me that it ran today!
Can't sleep now.
wow.. but I was talking to Maurice and they had a trainer meeting Tuesday he said we ain't gettin no bonus fam...
that is okayy! :)) And awesome!! Cant wait!
#thatannoyingmoment when someone buy an item that costs 1$ and pays with a 20..
Seeger: PR is about understanding audiences.
It's good when you can move into 'move along' mode at home!
WOW SO WRONG ON MANY LEVELS : Santorum: Obama's worldview upside-down; Says "radical environmentalists" don't view Earth serving Man
“: thanks for the RT! ^TO” Sharing In It All! ;)
oh, nice! im back this day two weeks! just in time for a gig, when you want a cutting dear?im taking bookings in bodyshock now =)
MT : Reimagine #tzedakah 4 the 21st century. Enter now , an awesome new project of !
Im trying to step my instagram game up very new to it. User name is cippycup.
You are your best source of EMPOWERMENT! You have it all, NOW!! Step into your (you're) MAGNIFICENCE!!
"Get a code sample" is one of the best pieces of dating advice I've ever received.
been crazy busy this week!!!
: Is that word making a come back cause you not the first person I done heard use that
my new twitter handle -
searching for a buyer/ procurement manager w/ heavy contract writing experience $$$ send resume to
I just found out about that a few weeks ago. LOL
congrats bro your team is the first one in the second round
I can't even watch a damn YouTube video without the same ad 45 times. I know why both candidates suck, I've been hearing it for 6 months now
Back amongst the peoples, where it belongs RT : The Proletary is back!
thanks for telling
Totally. You'll get the results at the time you're supposed to get them :)
A #book isn't an insoleted being: is a relation, an axis of countless relations. - Jorge Luis Borges
Girl: ur so random.:) bt i love tht about u. boy: thts me never the same twice always doing an sayin something diffrent.
Chris Bosh obviously should have won the MVP
Ugh, I don't want to do it, but I think I need to. This is dumb, and it shouldn't have happened. We can fix it.
Always glad to RT yours! Glad you do's what you do!
5 Unposter Elements = Introduction, Materials and methods, Results, Outstanding issues or conclusions and Key literature
Ah-nold and his "I survived Maria" tshirt can go cry in his Wheaties.
Symphony Crack going HAM in the lab..
And rightly so!! Go Caps!
nice! i take it you went to the classes?
as we all know, public health hates america
thought you to work at the jail
Thanks for the follow! We will check out your merch!
but like where us it filmed omg
And after that, thats when I put the headphones in, go to sleep and listen to the good music provided by
Like Stephanie. Do an extra rep for us today.
Hi Donny! We are showing darling Sebastian tonight at 8 on KPDX and at 10 on Fox12 :) Thank you for sharing the cute pic!
spending time with adrian
munching on carrots
depends on whether DeNiro and/or Pacino are signed on... it's semi-large budget.... are you coming to Vegas for CES?
sounds like that's the business to get into - or is it?
I disagree. The Dems should bring their messages and platform to NC. No sense going Big Sort on this.
Even if you lose everything, u'll always be me.
Cheers to our artworks! :))
Pencils make mistakes that's why erasers are manufactured!
we are blocked on Broadway and beaver
i want to go home :(
I <3 jeans days ! Always a special treat :)
RT : Enjoy a fabulous cuisine that will make your taste buds asking for more at The Old House Restaurant. 505-995-4530
Who is going to the wine and chocolate tasting at the Silver Spring Drive in Whitefish Bay tonight? Should be delicious!
Love is foolish ... but I still might try it sometime. ~ Floyd
MINK ultra lounge tonight!!.....
you're welcome:D and thx too! <3 hugs! See u later
I JUST MET A CAT I CAN'T FORGET THE TIME OR PLACE WHERE WE JUST MET SHE'S JUST THE CAT FOR ME AND I WANT ALL THE WORLD TO SEE WE'VE MET
Working hard for Brody's party tomorrow!!! #DrSeuss!
Shout out to for the wake up pic on her default... NICE!
I think I'm a little nervous for tonight.
Correct - NOLA attendees can access the virtual conference archive after 7/18
Aaawww! Brings memories when we wre the "Fantastic Four" "Charlie and his Angels"
i think we should do camp shabbat soon with only the camp songs!
No more redbox. You only get to watch 70% of the movie.
And that was 's #FF mad libs edition. Join us tomorrow with your bike!
lol naw it's possible I know some ppl that's real close like that
why is your site marked private now by wordpress?
Can U Please Help Me Get Jaden Smith's attention
I am definitely doing What's in a Name 5 Challenge!
no. yeast is not meant to be frozen.
Did you know - #DorothyHeight received awards from multiple presidents! Do you know which presidents they were?
you should've gone! then we could become international party people👲✈🎎🍻
Now would be the perfect time for my beats...my sister and dad are annoying the fuck outta me.
Cutting prints and watching the online! I wish I was in the water!!
#owasp Orlando Things I liked: Appsec Trivia. This is just fun! Need fewer questions and more time to discuss answers though.
lol...Girl you know it does!..lol SMH too many darn times. :)
RT : I thought it was on Sundays, now it is on Monday <<<<Tuesday
hell yeah ! & did you do that today ? You look awesome !
sure why not(x
Good Morning loves hope everyone enjoys this beautiful day
hair appointment in an hourish. any style you'd like to suggest? :)
I'm interested! thanks!
Me, too. :( RT : If there were three of me...my to-do list would be DONE.
Parappa vs. Kratos!? If it plays the way it should, I can't wait. Rhythm vs. QTE: who will triumph?
UNDER NEW MANAGEMENT
Wrote a 300+ line Python program yesterday (which works great!) entirely in nano. Who needs an IDE?
Had so much fun at prom 2011 last night!!! Thanks to everyone who voted for me for king, shoutout to my "subjects" long live the king!!
I'm not shocked , lol
Saturating myself in preperation for a new voiceover gig {for feature film 'The Advocate"} for tomorrow!
I plan to see the new star wars, forthwith, or not
already ;D
as a cute person- thanks!
Uh Oh, Trey Deliriouss.
I want to move. I'm finding it harder to wait for that.
I dont give a shit what anyone says tiny dancer is an amazing song # notsorry
RT : Woke up giving no fucks ....
What a productive day at the Educator Excellence Task Force meeting in Sacramento. Awed by the wisdom, talent in the room.
Did you see that is giving away a Bordy bobblehead!
God point!! But it is SoCal - a little sun wouldn't kill me. RT Would you prefer hottest and muggiest? ;)
How did everyone enjoy their Easter weekend?
Paper submitted with 35mins to go! Fuck yeah! Last assignment of the semester!
im a renegade of Funk!
Hi & of the 3, Denis Johnson is a writer who's long deserved it; yay to SmallBeerPress; many great books & what a wasted chance
2nd Annual Euchre Tournament in VictorWayne County Life - euchre
I can already see how this will go.
Working it out... S/O to TeamTrickyBizness...
if that d-bag goes free. Lots of people will take the law into their own hands from now on
she probably doesn't rlly check her DMs…only tweets♥
omg me too. Im just glad I'm not at school
deal! When your big race coming soon?
Interesting! I wouldn't have thought of her, but now that u mention it, I agree.
italians lemons: 1 tree, 3 seasons = 3 different lemons
shittiest mood ever. attempting to sleep this away
Kerry walks Furcal on 4 pitches. Command just been terrible all year.
livin in the moment
When will you both be in The Bean? And where are we having dinner?
What fun is a career if it isn't challenging? :)
Negotiating #Pinterest for the first time...
no, im from Brazil ): did you get?
#tastingthetown in the lake houston area was an incredible success! Thanks to all our sponsors,vendors, attendees and God for all u did!
Wish i was apart of those 5000. :C
you still sick? Hope you're feeling better!! Xo
its hard to stay focus but its all about learning how to balance your life
You are 25+ and livin at home with your parents and free loadin. Now
Not kidding, I voted for Geno 40 times yesterday. My finger still hurts from all the clicking!
at wrk just say hey
C'mon #Brewers. We need one of those six-run innings!
Quite possibly prominent fashion designer suitcases in the- suitcases
Today is the day for people to piss me the fuck off.
This guy looks like a fashion mashup btwn Purple Rain era Prince and Bruno Mars. It's weird, and wonderful!
can't wait to hear the results! What's your go-to coffee of choice?
Kuzz i dont trust these bitches.. (:
Thrilled to be cast in the next mainstage production at , "The Magic Bullet Theory" playing a Texan government spook.
Graduation tonight. As you all know, I've been waiting for this moment for forever! Love you guys!
Yes. Im finger painting hahaha
Thanks for standing by me, for all the support & RTs from those continuing to do so while the laptop is being repaired greatly appreciated.
RIGHT NOW #Obsessions Brings LIVE!! #X #PoleDancer #Strippers #Ass ALL OVER THE PLACE TONIGHT / 4525 Glenwood Rd Decatur Ga
Thanks, glad to hear you like it here! RT : Pizzas are definitely #fresh out the oven there! Nice vibe also.
Back then hoes ain't want him, now he's hot, hoes all on him... Who? Mike Mains
Appreciated... You moved me a lot!
Im not giving up.
stop that!
So I find out when I cancelled my Service Magic account 2 yrs ago they never removed my info and have siphoned business from me ever since
War #TeamJolene co-hosting with
On the music menu today: örhead sounds good to me!!
awesome to hear :) thanks for coming by!
SHE STARTED iT!...
I'm going to the movies later with my friends Kayla and Joe to see Date Night... I can't wait! :)
Ok old a$$ movies on the set gotta go have a night like no other people!!! Retro inspirations ahead:)))) peace cinema and hope
im multitasking between twitter, survivor, homework, and desperate housewives LOL
*iPhone falls to the floor* Breaks screen. *android falls to the floor* Breaks floor.
new to twitter :) please follow me?!
you're only partially listening to joe if you feel that way.
para-para-paradise; every time she closed her eyes.
sucks off all night
;P Soo? What Time Should I Come Over Your House Tomorrow?
and there yyou go! :)
“: Great session today. #XXIII ” Agreed!
RT Standing for #Liberty in America: “I Want Your Money” - goo.gl/l9f1L #Vote2012 LOL!
Chillin like a villain. Joining the iPhone family soon
Yeah and some indie stores had a limited edition lithograph with purchase. Very smart and thoughtful promo.
Hahaha, yeah, too many condoms.
Haha yes, I think it'll be nice for me to try out a new city. It was a really, really tough choice, though!
hahah well thanks :)
15 minutes to go! Looking for 50 Dream Makers. Show & some love. Call 800-457-KIDS NOW and become a Dream Maker!
derp. no. the butt thing was due to sliding down the huge metal side of that bridge in millennium park. in a skirt.
How was your day. :)
If any policy is wrong as unconstitutional our duty is to oppose. Once that distinction is lost, the rest is expediency, opinion and polls.
thanks, that means a lot. I know right now is really hard but I'm here for you, anytime <3
john phillips and Manuel johnson were also part of that draft class. Buehler is gone.
Nelson Winners -CA- Martin, Treasurer-Johnson, Super South Saunders
I hate group projects with a passion -__-
#FYCchat How did you learn how to teach, solely from your mentor? Research on your own? Were your peers int. in pedagogy?
Oh man, I haven't seen the trailer yet! I should hunt that down...
mr lekousis tryna identify whales.. Hope the loins r in the healin process
Last night at was an amazing experience. S/o to
I actually am following you.. Already
I can't wait till school ends though!
Grill has to go, but I do like this song.
Ahaha Up is so funny..... squirrel!!
Much more than you think. Latest poll has Walker up by 9 points.
Free yogurt tonight at the grand opening of Menchie's in the highlands! 6-8pm
I see what you mean - single-spaced looks a little dense.
we listen. Start talking.
Why does homework have to be so stressing?
Yo mamma is so skinny that she uses a cheerio as a hula-hoop.
hello Lauren! do you work w ? I'm at GSFC and work on enterprise social media and have been to a few NASA tweetups...
Loving this weather, first week at the new job has been good!! SDOE
minus one! Wish I could have joined
Have an awesome day :)
oops..remember to keep it on the down-low, else might find out
Sounds like you need a mental health day dear.
I still freak out every time i hear one direction on the radio... (:
How's everyone's #NaPoWriMo going? I'm a bit behind. 6 poems to go with 4 days left.
I love you Madisonn<3 hope you had a good day(:
what did you finally hit 2,000
Has everyone enjoyed the sessions so far? Y'all are pretty quiet on Twitter, so hopefully you're just totally engrossed. ;)
As it turns out it didn't matter
I really want to go somewhere this summer...
Beautiful evening; sunny and warm today, but not hot yet. Cool out right now. Enjoy it now, because soon it will be hot, hot, hot.
Groundswell for NFL-type playoff...does he really believe that? If so, he lives in a cave.
This man has outstanding taste! RT Everyone follow and my favourites!
that nigga took yo shit and being and gave it back p.s
how are you? :)
I never cared if I gambled just as long as I was there,its my fav place 2 be in the whole world. Tackle 4 m ...
haha alright no van for you :P lol but ok last car question :P what's your dream car that you always wanted :) ?
that was so sweet. Ben has a good friend.
Don't eat fried Rice and mentos b4 going to the gym. I haven't tried that hard NOT to throw up since I accidently saw my grandma's vagina.
hahaha Glad I'm not the only one!
Edwin McCain . <3
a fool wit it..
"Making a difference is making someone better than you found them"
"All things are possible through Christ our lord who givs me strength" Phil 4:13
so it looks like we're going USE_TZ=False on because it already used timezones :-)
did it really??
#Obama you DISGRACE THE USA with your support for faggs and lesbo's .....your a sick president ....sad
i always got your back coc
Crazy day yesterday
WHITEwater RT : I'm gonna need #TeamTurnUp to come out to Whitewater sometime lol
YoU gOttA FoLLoW n ThEy'LL fOllOw BaK x3 >>...
Wondering why #Portland doesnt have a WPS team. Seems like a perfect fit. Portland Thorns?
the psycho bitches!
Love it! RT ": RT : Rams entering contract talks w/atlantas les snead to make him teams new gm
There's a chance w/machines that a virus will be created to shut them all down. But they could prob create a virus to shut us down too :/
awesome ! we'll be back in a couple days :)
Hope to see everybody out at the LSU vs Florida game this weekend!!! -Evan
agreed, go with Bao!
Looking for the perfect company to complete our tenant roster
So sad to not be at c. What was I thinking?
Last year. Lots of people cared.
When you start hearing curse words in your mind, it's time to turn that plate over.
Still high from last night performance & gotta look at this contract now
RT : Get your facts first, and then you can distort them as much as you please. ~Mark Twain
Let's go Flyers!
Good Morning!!!!!
thanks girl....
You go out in public and don't shower in 3 days,
Sitting in the Board Room in Mason Hall. My 5yr-old son looks at the portrait of GMU's President and says: "He looks like a leprechaun"
Nice Weather in NY ;)
Ill never write a song wont even sing along
if you use Tweetbot, just tap and hold a tweet and it will give you an option to save links to whatever service you choose. :)
Life may hand me a bag full of lemons but I am plenty old enough to go buy a gallon of Jose and knock back a helluvalot of shooters!
the sun is out. but its still cold out this bitch
Not yet! We'll keep it in mind if we get any car models that start with "O"
We build. We create. We don't wait! Viva TFOS!
now THAT is tweet worthy.
Thanks! You guys rock!
Bmore Mayor George William Brown, city council, the police commissioner & Francis Scott Key's grandson were detained there!
Green Insight: 70% of consumers consider themselves "Sustainable Mainstream"
no one bother texting me.phones cut off.
easy. Castro has WAY more fans in the US.
YO, bring your ass here for my bday and we can make a gang trip to Chick-fil-A. There's one AND a Sonic w/in 5 mins of my apt.
Thanks for the follow.
Bwahaha. Love to see movies of women grabbing for it.
we could have a mtg at relay for life tomorrow! I know would approve!
Looking forward to presenting at MCN Atlanta: Trickle up, Trickle down: Collaboration at local, regional and the national levels.
you two gonna cuddle tonight?
I love a good battle!!
When's the all clear to venture out in my Derby Sombrero!?
RT : "Write your Plan in Pencil But Give God the Eraser" (via )
Today is my 15th BIRTHDAY and I love you so so so much! Will you please follow me back???! <3 :) 90
lol...OK well let me think about this then:)
good! I was about to cry lol
Were all the AASL awards announced yet? Anyone know?
A part of me wonders who is babysitting Malia and Sasha, and if they're watching the #SOTU too.
#cxo - Hey all, glad to be here :) My is acting up, so I may have some late replies...
Austin Is our World .<3
Thank you, Wishing you a great day!
So #ReadyOrNot Meeks best track off the tape?
HWI...countdown is on...Only SEVEN more days!!!!
Hahahahah what a fucking joke.. Get a clue
Colin Powell~ There are no secrets to success. It is the result of preparation hard work and learning from failure.
Thank you, Patrick!
wont see my request and i have no chance of skyping him.....
Thank you
try to make it once a year, preferably in the summer. And yourselves?
You're right to be proud! This from a third-generation ad guy always looking for talent. Thanks for State of Union distraction.
ask he will know!
NYC here I come! where can a faghag go for fun drag queen kareoke?
Congratulations love!!!!!
So much for that I quess.! :(
HAHAH I AM ALIVE! I've been watching a movie with my dad lol.
It's not just one bill. It's been bill after bill after bill after bill he's been wrong on.
Are you interested in Helping with ? Contact CoCo @ 202-534-8151
Met some aweseome followers this week!
thats cute hahah! I will suggest that(: tumblr is a smart place to look
On a design binge today - totally revamping the FuseBox site.
thank you!
Today's #writetip: resist the urge to respond to every criticism. You can't debate your way out of a bad review.
Paul Ryan must have failed math class! Sad to say we're both in Wisconsin!!!
If Foursquare created a coupon model a la Groupon for check-ins, would that be a Groupon killer?
RT : You hire for attitude and train for success you cannot train what HR does not catch! <My fave quote from
He can't be worth my time, because I'm obviously not worth hiss.</3
"i may think with my penis but at least i think" gotta love two and a half men.
#ThingsInMyLifeThatArePriceless My time. I don't give it to just anybody so if you get it, u know you're important. Please don't waste it.
are you my cousin?
Diablo these girls tweet the same quote shit like stop stealing quotes from them parody pages
IM RIPPED LOL
Some ppl have all the luck when it comes to love
Nick Stahl is apparently missing. Has someone questioned Clancy Brown?
Sounds like someone is in #Kipcamp heaven.
i love finding directioners on omegle :)
I agree!
Tweeting power yeehaaw!!
Just had a little bday tap session with my little one! Damn does time fly...
dude stop taking out your shit on me. go play some more black ops.
Let's talk! Follow for DM...
The answer to everyones problems ": okay this aint gonna work i need to cum..."
Great Pic I agree.Go Pack Go.
ive had a bottle of champagne ready for 25 years. is it really happening or is oprah pulling a jay leno?
Going to Africa - Senegal in 30 days to shoot a documentary! Getting Malaria shots tomorrow...
I'm shocked at how great all the guys are on idol. What a pleasant surprise.
The show was amazing...big ups to edify2
Check out our latest websites. SpectrumPI.com, CoferInvestmentGrp.com, DouglasvilleB2B.com.
Two can play that.game .
Had a great business idea this weekend. I'm gettin ready to write out a business plan, so that I can start make my own money.
Must be human beings that audience sympathize with.
RT : The way you see people is the way you treat them. -- Zig Ziglar
The adventure begins #sanfrantoday :)
Scott, would love to include you as a source for article on media outlets picking up other outlets' satirical stories as real...
Hell yess! Goo packers!
yeah, this is pretty wild. I only go out for starbucks and sushi on San Mateo Ave.
is an amazing boyfriend! :)
Nothing does the trick like a 2nd floor window table overlooking Lake Mendota.
No school tomorrow
thanks awesome!!! Feel free to tell your friends :)
The story you are about to see is a fib. But it's short. The names are made up but the problems are real.
Im re-living all the pain of losing the most important person in my life.
what up Purrp!
Now THAT is rain.
it's too bad bella never gets an I CANT CHOOSE speech because jacob is never a serious contender
Red Box.
you know a tea has become more like an art than a drink when you enjoy it on a 90s+someDegree night. *sips her hot Constant Comment tea.
Back in Ann Arbor. Time for another "unpack/repack" episode.
I missed my 9000th tweet thanks to Instagram 😒 lol
school & work & stuff. where have you been?
i wishh i could be spending mothers day with my mom. ill see her soon though /:
: The Big V? I get it as often as I can ===> "big V"- I was gonna tweet, no one would get it
I thought the point was to treat women as equals. If not, then I did miss the point.
We got some new shit comin your way REAL soon, yeaahhhhh
Less than an hour away from Strauss veal at !!! Yum!
Adele,can sang she's such a lovely voice
For every person that retweets this status i will throw a skittle at my sister in law while she tries to read harry potter.
Ah I hate spiders!
Just got up and might hang with BF...maybe a good day
Ugh. How crazy is Giroux going just watching this game right now? Brutal.
Awesome!! Loved that film!!
Awesome, old-school, off-the-eyebrows hook. Better in the old days, of course, without helmets
tell spencer keep his head high Bro, as long as he put it all out on the court hes a winner, physically and mentally
from an album the school jazztet did
put a chicken in the pot
It's never good when u don't get a response lol
Guess who's on the streets though. Tip got my license biotches!!!!
Good tips & resources to play with from Table for One session.
Let's bring this back to L.A.
I followed :)
is ready for Rock on the Range 2012. If I can just get Stevo to stuff the audio recorder up his ass we are set.
44-17 MIL this one is over
So your an A&R Consultant? Can I send beats to you?!
Disservice when putting "social impact" concept in a separate, "precious" space. Suzanne #integration of
I got the perfect prank to pull today
Hump Back!
so glad that #letsgetobstinate has inspired you to end your 13 month drought on Twitter!
Scramble with friends is like suppppperrrr duppperrrr FUN!! Talk about testing your vocabulary skills. Wheeww. Very challenging
yep im not listening to him :-)
welp u can sit there n wait, n ill bring her to u..no need to change places...
Tomorrow we go back into the studio. We'll be posting updates on our progress through here (twitter), so keep your eyes open :) We love you!
So ready this! $$$ RT : More tickets for the Pink Friday US Tour go on sale this Sat, the 12th.
chads a bitch
"I wish I didn't know now what I didn't know then"
thank you mam!
After reigning victorious last night in the weekly hold em league, looking forward to watching the Jackets clinch their 1st playoff spot!!!
I just checked it out! Its nice. I was looking at the models etc...too
Bee-U-ti-ful shot, Kay!
Nothing like starting your week with a blue screen of death. I just wanted to charge my ipod... Come on!
Our fund raiser raised $3k for High Tech High Int and had 75 people. Thank you all for the support. we have the best clients!!
Again, what does that have to do with the killing if Trayvon Martin? What's your point?
congratulations on your graduation!
"Harry was attacked by a goat when he was 10." LOL. I would love to see this!
MS VALLEY GUARDS ON THE TAKE?
I'm coming out
well, based on presidence, I figure $20mil to exit BE. In addition, who knows for a friend. That's a lot
See you for the double feature this weekend :)
Time to let my mind wonder about what to change in my classroom/teaching in the new year
RT : #HappyMother'sday ! #Motherhood is the most sacred profession.
thanks for sharing
please follow me♡♡ I'm fucking in love with you, just notice me, please :'( 97
but paris hilton is going to be at the kaskade show. the kaskade show that I'M GOING TO.
haha Greg this is not the real jeremy lin! 2 for $15 is truly the greatest trade ever
Scratch that - this is the John Lucas game.
I cut my thumbnail too short so I might as well drop out of college and school some people on how self-immolation is done.
Heartened to know about coop btw Internet Arch & UCSC. ... A silent Dead archive site would be a very sad thing indeed
yes. A taste of their own medicine. ;-)
i love watching abit of devvo at 10 in the morning haha!
i thuggs with the new twit name gucci haven bur
Bo, all good. Just killing time.
so um LEAD is at the student center, not the house... um yea... thanks for the ride anyways
Some of the highlights from this report include the popularity of games by platform and stats on the top publishers
Watch BOYFRIEND Video. Beliebers, Haters, Everybody watch the video. We need to have 5.8 million+ views in 24 hours to break the record.
So, I was going to post on ROD yesterday, but then I was dumb and ate pizza, giving myself a migraine in the process. TODAY, THOUGH.
Of course they do, having the greatest player of all time and the best center in the league, with their playoff experience?
For what helmet?
you dont look that bad haha :p
hahahahah no way. ARKANSAS RAZORBACK FAN.
it's not a freeroll dummy. Booked or not. Valid for 2minutes.
"Bananas have changed so much I don't know whether I'll like them in 10 yrs." -Some guy I overheard who obviously needs more to worry about.
how do you make a trend im new to twitter??
youtube this...debt=money...check out the banking secrets
Wow why can't there be nice guys around here who like the same music as me?
you got it done deal
When reads my texts but doesn't text back<<<< 💔😭
fine fine..beautiful our names
We've spent more time discussing this than we spent discussing how to get peeps to buy our products.
Just a month to go before the jewish high holidays! What are you looking forward to the most this year?
Vegan cheese tastes... vegan.
The positive will immediately be followed by a two-second negative or the lowering of the weight during which you will inhale
who is the 1 person we go after to do that?
33rd during his rookie season.
yeah I'm ok with Zia having other friends too. I'm not crying inside at all... :-p
Thank you for following NSHMBA-NM! Find out more at: nshmba.org
Good Night John Paul!
i like this guy how will i kno how he feels
This should be good... How is everything?
Balling my eyes out. Why can't he like me?
I'm playing battlefield and.......god I suck.
Tweet to us or call & mention twitter & get FREE registration! (248) 581-3942
#Broncos made a lot of stupid mistakes and got beat by a team who I knew would by our toughest team but still proud of our team!
(4-sale) real estate in Costa Rica 4-5 star resort properties. jv 's also looking for funding in costa rica,
HM, Well Im pretty funny in real life...Guess that doesnt count via Twitter! lol
It is not about the loss, but understanding the lesson. Live to fight another day
**0844 880 2010** Globalnet telecom Channel Partner recruitment drive. Exclusive deal! Give us a call for a chat and details.
Cherish the friend who tells you a harsh truth, wanting ten times more to tell you a loving lie.
Commuting by bike gives me a chance to take a good break from thinking about Records Management issues that drive me nuts during the day
We ordered hooligans at my job hope its good, never had it before.
Typo people...TYPO...LOL It's MOT!!!!
You Are Not Your Website
Fine. I reject them either way. Glad not to have to dry clean my coat every time I go to a bar, but now they're going too far.
Getting ready to leave for a fun day at the water park! I'm looking forward to the rides!!:)
Last day of January means last day for $100 savings!!! Call now to book your event!
Get ready for single Show Out ft. to drop May 22
A phantom "illegal screen" foul call on the last meaningful play of a one possession playoff game. Yup, exactly why I don't watch the
Daily GTKY question: What do you always say?
Junior Seau. There are no words. He was a damn good football player and had a sports show on Versus.
RT “ She | Tyler The Creator is my Shit!”
Diversion? I understand now, never thought of it, great perception! Thanks.
It's a Disney kinda day...
Beijing allows activist Chen to study abroad
aw (: same to you best friend !
Heart broken :(
cool. i'll check it out.
awesome on the trip to Ascot. Is ya local Caulfield Mensland making you ya top hat and tails? See ya there
Happy Star Wars Day! #MayTheFourth be with You!
It's official, i gave into twitter. So I am here! woo!!
I know!!! It seems so far away. :/
Bus stopped at Madison Wisconsin... Now getting back on 1-90 East
hahaha. Pretty good overall. Nice moments like that. What i love about his films are those moments- realism
Too much Fez. Everything feels like it can be fixed by changing literal perspective. Headache? Look in mirror sideways.
Some "grown" ass women/men can become petty if they feel threatened by you ---> Keep up the good work.
I <3 THE NEW KIND! I'm also working w/ & on a diff project but am so excited for TNK. Great work!
People are really some simple/closed minded individuals these days...sh*t bugs me out...Where the sophisticated broad-minded people go?!
I'll take you to school. Lol very soon
me too! I own a magic bullet, pancake puff pan, and that brownie pan where they're all edges.
I can't believe I woke up this early... 8:02 AM?! No way! Back to bed... lol. :)
first of all, you did the right thing by hiding under this table
Very cool to see Marty Newey/Paul Thomas (Salt Lake City) at ASTD Mt. Diablo's Chapter meeting (SF Bay Area) last night
Perseverance is the hard work you do after you get tired of doing the hard work you already did.
btw in Greece had great tour guides & the more history they shared the happier we were! Inspired 2 find my Kefi!
glad I didn't send any tit pics
For slow XMPP auth the solution is pre binding, which serves an authenticated connection with page load.
curious to see who uses twitter at 4:00am EST #appointmentlink is it beauty time or time for sleep?
I was wondering that too...Cause it's actually TCACA
I'd be shocked if I found a song I like more than that this year!! I can't wait for it to go off tomorrow!
Just start an urban myth about it. RT : Oh no! Snopes is down! How can I prove an email story to be fictitious?
Thanks for the RT of our Postseason Baseball Media Info, really appreciate an alum spreading the word!
Cute. I can't add a trumpety "Whaaa whaa whaaaaaa" sound so this tweet will have to do. ;)
ITS STAMPED!!!! IS OFFIALLY DJ!!! #MONEYTRAIN next stop harrisburg W.V 3-28-12 red lounge
about to lay sum musik dwn in the lab getting shit done #imherenowthealbum coming in the late fall!
I just ate dis #checkers & now I feel lazy as sh*t!!!
Dear Mr Vending Machine man. Thanks so much for allowing me to be entertained as I watch folks try to figure out the touchscreen dispenser.
I may just take you up on that one day. Can I bring Conrad? ;-)
The answer to everything is..shut up c: Are you..shut up Hey..shutup I..shut up No matet ehat they say you can always answrr with shut up(;
so disappointed in our stay, we always enjoy the #embassysuites but this is embarrassing #Orlando Lk BV
CBB Sunday.. Clemson +7 & Stanford +1 for regular season action. I'll watch for Tourney stuff as the lines become available. Good Luck!!!
Plane Crash Update 3 persons on plane that crashed this morning at Dane Co Airport. Minor injuries. Airport will re-open soon!
check out Elephant from Damien Rice
Poop farts in my butt
Enjoyed my #Shakeology w/ Almond milk this morning. Love drinking chocolate milk & shakes that nutritious+delicious!
Eviction time is almost here. To be the best you have to out work all competitors.
Peppermint toothpaste or table salt right on the bite stops itching.
Not yet. That's why we must brace ourselves! :D Tomorrow though.
So many great new followers! Thx
Seton Hill's summer reading text is the graphic novel Persepolis. Our disability accommodation staff was a bit flummoxed to find out... 1/2
#usdla2011 learning about delivering student orientations via YouTube.
RT More good news! My album is now available 4 pre-order on iTunes! If u get it now u will get it at the special pre-sale price!
#civilwar FOTD. On this day in 1864, Kilpatrick's men pushed south on their raid & Confederates in Richmond began to fortify their defenses.
it's not for me, it's Chris who's getting it. I will send you a picture of my new ink when in done.
aahahahahahahahahaha i just died thats so awesome
"You're stupid." "I could be that too." <3 Love it!
Mimosas and painting. Get here now.
"Nothing in this world can take place of persistence" - Calvin Coolidge
Rendón: We need to practice more diverse ways of knowing in the classroom beyond linguistics and logical mathematics.
lol it's in brooklyn, you remember diddy made making the band walk
also rode on a helicopter today
I'm moving out. someone get me .
I love you for my daughter and I'm glad your her idle but moms on #teamgiveup I tryed to get you to follow but we love ualways
LOL. It's all good.
Traffic makes me angry. I just wanna be home
High drama in the NFL!!! Wow
morning love! <3
At artful ink in bohemia getting a tattoo for a cure!! Come down to support cures for cancer
Where's my computer guy when I need him?
amazing win. Congrats.
Travelocity Travel: Cheap Airline Tickets, Hotels, Flights, Vacations ...
I've used comapping for case presentations. I'll give prezi another try. Agree that certain limitations can improve teaching
The final presentation of has begun, "The Last Night of Caroline's Blues" by Timothy J. Guillot!
i'm not sure-but if so it is still forgiven since the Spy is so lovely. and dang that's lame u guys dont get it there
Ah best in show, you are the best movie for a #Saturday night of relaxation.
**Raises solidarity fist in air**
passionate about advancing good causes and interesting projects I'm working on in mobile development and cleantech
#imagine Austin protecting you while a swarm of fans attacked him !
yes! The Blue Bean and a mom car... No one can say no to that deal.
How many since Feb 2008 are still unemployed and cannot file anymore? Claim numbers are misleading!
Thanks for everything Peyton, you trully are one of the best.
grease was right the only guy a girl can trust is her daddy
UofL basketball is finally here, looking good cards
check out my new background. Just finished it:)
Make that face to the teacher that turned his back.... yep your cool _-_
I think it would be fun to do a show about non-profits in the LA area! I'm biased of course.
Well hello there
you can tweet him directly..
I'm having a yard sell tomorrow. Get at me for details.
I ain't ask u to smile u suppose to say it bak!! Lol
ur such an amazing friend xD follow me ALEX DOES U SHOULD TO
all i want to do is apply for jobs and talk ideas. i feel mildly & pleasantly evolved.
56$ for VIP, 46$ for next tier, 29$ for next tier. This being I'm thinking VIP for this one!!
Thanks a lot Aaron Rodgers. Now is playing Boyz II Men over the Derby coverage.
getting better at volleyball (:
you should tweet about this band called poema!! ! :) they are awesome!!!! you'd love them!
Me thinks this year I'm have to go against my principals in order to get a great education
I think I'll head to the French market this morning. Should be nice for photos; no harsh shadows (maybe!).
oh, that is a frowny face :-( did you not locate it?
Good seeing and having the opportunity to catch up with him at the event earlier this evening.
mine are starting too.. :(
Bama lost today. Such a shame. LOL
Having your book turned into a movie is like seeing your oxen turned into bouillon cubes. John LeCarre
I wish I had the energy to do this sort of thing for my 2,000th follower when I get there one of these days! (and may yet)
8/23/2010 The best time of day to Tweet and how often to post on Twitter BusinessBlogs
Wow. Are you serious? They really are an evil empire. "Total Sports Network" my ass.
Anyone interested in writting about YOTT 2012? got an great collection of tees but he is also very musically talented too!
President of comparing business commerce to #Moneyball. You can change #supply chain like Billy Beane changed baseball.
After an entire day of feeling sick and laying in bed, I am now fully awake!!! Goodday tweeps!!!
Shout me out <3 [:
I like the DB jar in the background
if i were a boy, i'd listen yo her, cus i know how it hurts.
send it to me. I'll read it
PIZZA FACT: Fact of the day: Did you know Tarte flambée is also popular French pizza, originating in the Bas-Rhin region of Alsace in...
that's not
Anyone going to warped tour this year? Who are you excited to see?
I'll send you a treatment and some questions if you like. Let's Follow each other and DM emails.
Great lunch with :) she thinks im funny :)
true that! shouldn't have to
John Shurna is THAT GUY. Seven straight shots to win college 3-point shootout.
Biggest grammatical pet peeve: A-whole-nother. e.g. That's a whole nother matter altogether. Nother is not a word.
i can't lie, i'm a sucker for the show
I don't even fucking know what a puss nugget is but I'll go with it
Your love for me got me Up to see another sunny day And I just wanna say Thank you God the Love of my life Amen ! STOP killing are Future !
No Chauncy on the site? Mr. Warmth should have a photo of Sir Chauncy somewhere, I think. Still, a Very Nice Website.
Back from vacation and of course having computer issues- I guess it doesn't want to get back to work.
In December. I'll be very ready by then. Plus we can wear Bermuda shorts and you can wear a visor instead of a fedora.
don't be shy, if you have any questions ask away :P
We have! Looks like a great conversation--wish I had time to participate.
don't trash the 'nati
i hate it here!</3
Ngga . Our parents are exactlly the same -.-
Actually, I think she might have applied for the position, but it was already filled.....
He's blind now and going on feel.
Bout to see think like a man, act like a lady!! 😄
missing when justin wasn't as famous. i wish i could've met him back then.
Belvedere and Grape Soda.
That one felt good! RT : Pretty good win for the
Seeing sounds
Instead of saving money I will pay of all my debt first. Okai Haiti
Have a great #weekend, everyone!
Who wants to move to North Carolina with me. That way I'll at least know one person there lol
Happy Birthday !!!
Dude - you should delete those "working mom" tweets from when your account was hacked.
#YouKnowItsBadWhen you read "nail" as "Niall"....
I know. But that dumbass is still going to p. e.
I'm at the Epic rummage sale- 2436 1st ave, mpls - many records and other arty goods!
Woo hoo! In that case..good riddance :P RT : Don't worry, you still have plenty of fans at Channel 4
Hey my phones fucked up. I gotta get a new one
A developer is proposing an office building at the southwest corner of 86th and Georgetown Road. Old location of a Wake Up gas station.
thank you -a dreary afternoon of working on a cover letter has been offset by the secret underground bases of LMS CEOs
All you are, to everyone, is a girl who is sad. A girl everyone wants. A tease. A giver. A taker. A liar. A fake.
#winenight and maybe
pre happy nootz year!!! My nootz year resolution is to go bar down short side through the five hole then grab some frozen water
Wish we could see you tonight at HOB. Celebrating my 4yo birthday, have a great time while you are here!
People are in such a hurry to get to the "good life" that they often rush right past it.
Hey how bout you just stick to acting like a nice person...cuz the real you is not at all. PS-you are a grown woman!
Zayn and Perrie... not really a big fan of this, idk but im not hating on her js...oh well :/
I hate staying up late. :/
3 hour swim practice
thanks for following!
I need to send letter and poster (:
It comes on 8pm on "regular" TV, but it's taped, not live; if you have DirectTV, you may be able to find a live airing at 5pm.
and I only have seen the east coast anyways so idk truthfully... But you can tell me your thoughts
Totally made my night. Thankyou, I love you! <3 RT “: i love your tweets :) x”
it's a front door. in a HUGE crate. in our dining room. never forwarded our paperwork to the installation company.
killed it up next
That's just paper editions & similar %age also believe paper money will cease to exist & artificial limbs will outperform real ones.
I'll be okay, just a few bumps, bruises & fractures... lost mobility in part of my right hand : ( hopefully it's only temporary
Tweet me when you finish your documentary; would love to see it. Specifics?
As in accomplishments? Successes? How is MKE better today than when he took over?
A3 Standardize outbound comm processes & train employees across the marketing, sales and customer service groups on new core messaging
i really don't want to do my homework..
I miss how it use to be
the Roots are the heart of musical expression thru n thru.
RT : My Aunt: 'Free is the best, ya gotta get things when they're free.' Me: 'Yeh, like Sex..!' ;P
hey! I saw your videos! Really cool!
Is that raw chicken in a bowl in Debra Messing's living room?
it's my house lolol
I just created an avatar with a bio and its so powerfulN
Philadelphia Dining Deals and Events: April 30-May 6 ~ Food News ...
Time for the homegrown Hoosier to show us what he has! Let's go !
How does Florida have 2 hockey teams???
what are you talking about
Hell yea doing the same brody, we gotta chop it up one day so we can blow a log of that kush.
happy valentine's day!!! ....... had a question. what piercings do u have?
You all better go to my show tomorrow. \m/
is on Twitter? The guy who hates bloggers?I guess you have to shlep the shit when you run for office.
dont u hate it when 1 of your friends stab u in the back takes the knife out then just stabs u again
Time to get more ill.
Yes and Iowa is Blue!
happy bday 2 u! u live in a zoo! u look like a monkey! and u smell like one too! :P jk I love u!
Take a fucking tit out..
My iMac's 3rd birthday and end of warranty was March 1st. Naturally, it would flat out stop working on March 6th. Ugh!
Annotated bibs and lit review: complete! Just a little more grading!
but i have no clue what i did with it and i should probably find it....
#ificouldiwould .... tell you..but im not.
Sadly not. If I come, I'll arrive Friday night and leave Sunday afternoon.
you will have a baby to take care of (: I thought you only liked his song boyfriend? haha I didn't know you liked him like tha
TY for the feature! RT Also, check out our new Pooch Pal @ www.poochandbones.com
Was in my moms work office waiting until it was time for my appt. Now waiting in the car till 5pm because my moms manager is a b**ch. -_-
Drake concert or Birthday Bash. Hmm
Tip of the day: If youre tired of standing then alls you got to do is fall down.
It's official! Spending my summer writing for a non-profit in Haiti! Just PR for an NGO? Or an amazing life experience? I prefer the latter.
The only good thing about being an alcoholic is that no one ever asks me to drive them anywhere.
“: Today was a nice day, we should hang more you know you're always welcome to hang with me & Ali ;) x haha”Hehe(:
"Ventura.." "Yes, Satan? ... Oh, excuse me, Sir, you sound like someone else."
I love constructive criticism
hoping i get home early enough to swing past the new pie shop that opened by my apartment.
Racing your global studies teacher on the highway.. #it'snormal
lol this convo is getting way too deep lol...
“: Epic taxi ride right now” hahahhaha
The diff btwn 1st gen college students & defecation is that w/ the 1st, retention is the goal, whereas w/ the 2nd, it's the exact opposite.
Thanks for following! Such an important niche you are in. What help fund co's that are premature for bank LOC's. Excited to connect!
Sometimes the happiest songs can make you the saddest because they remind you of good times that you can never get back...
I'm 100% with of the anti-bullying campaign, but it doesn't have to be another fight.We simply need to learn to love & be more compassionate
what place u at?
In the end, you'll realize you only have few true friends. But that's better than having many random friends.
awww CUTE!!! (; u guys r so good together
a bro u had work today
If love had a Song/Sound/Voice it'd sound like Beyonce's "Countdown". Btwn the Peaks, Breakdowns, Instruments, Lyrics, & BEY's voice! #DONE!
Upset lost a friend I was hurting and you kicked me while i was down Your pride got in the way Get to beggin bc I rarely give 2nd chances
#raw10 I thought by 2010, we would be driving hoover crafts as cars. I know a Guy who still drives a 78 Dodge. What advancement?
Rosie Milligan Did you know that people between the age of 40-50 suffer from depression more than all age groups, including the elders..
I no yo secrets girl
hahaha that's what I'm talkin about but there a difference between curves bony n just fat
Mayor: Crime rates are going down. But if you don't feel safe, it's another problem. Part of the solution is police presence
Yahoo! is discontinuing Meme... you remember Meme, right? Yeah, that's like telling you the band Len broke up.
Project X was god
Want 2 meet this weekend but have a stupid bar mitzvah 2 go 2 y this weekend wait 4 for me jb we have the same initials ily <3
Deleting this page... Official website soon. See you there
I'm going to check out some jazz at Radegast tonight.
I love <3
This weekend will go down in history as the one in which I followed and then unfollowed Jose Canseco.
I want to go home. :l
What are you storing locally on a netbook that you really need FDE? Or are you just being our usual level of paranoid?
Good morning sunshine(s)! Thank you for the follow !
what's up with the eug this weekend?
Nice action shot in the nyt :)
in science
had an awesome time playing v-ball at church tonight :)
Ah steroid shot....
#glee Jane and Dot hugging. I'm dying right now.
Who's around this summer?! Come in and join us for a tasty meal!
Not as good as me!
Mom: are you gay? Me: why are you asking me this? Mom: I want grand kids. Me.....ok....*walks out the room*
I use to love that song!! Lol! I use to turn the volume up & sing it out like I was performing for millions! Lol!
Happy B-day Martha June!!!
“How vain it is to sit down to write when you have not stood up to live.” ~ Henry David Thoreau
Her Body Shape Like An 8 .. Face Of A Dime.
We will never forget the voice of a true angel RIP Whitney <3
Wow, talk about a turn on
Quoting SuperbHerb: "I skipped #sxsw to go on the #librotraficante caravan." What did YOU do over Spring Break?
We'll be in the kitchen all day. If you come later in the day, we'll probably have more available.
The PAC... like shooting fish in a teacup
do you have a site with more detailed instructions for finishing the scarves?
OMG!!!woman so is it from Facebook to Twitter to Skype???
President Obama speaks to the nation's students today...many parents support the speech...others plan to protest. What do you think?
missed you last night keeley <3 i wanted to call you but everytime i tried to find a phone, i forgot what i was doing lol
Then say “I want to pee, can I go out?”. and you runaway. lol
I'm really glad I waited until the last minute to write two 20-page papers... again
Voice reel!
Learning more effective ways to use social networking.
Waaaaaaaaaaaahhhhhhhhh i don't wanna do this ): Thanks, babygirl!
Of course. Pure Rove playbook move. 10 years from now, we'll be ashamed of this period of time.
Laibach are old skool Austrian anti-fascists
Lmao hell yeah...i heard that shit dis morning
that's dope man!
British Governments
I'm watching & chatting about #celebrityrehab - join the conversation at celebrityrehab.vh1.com
It's only a matter of time! The hard work always pays off.
“ Dreams are like STARS. U may never touch them, but if u follow them they will lead you to YOUR DESTINY. ~
My dad made a 2 hour drive in 40 mins on a bike.
: Way to plan ahead! You have to w/ VT. We did off-season: Nov. Still nice, but not very green. Our day was magical. Hope yours is 2!
Spent the evening at Warner Bros. For film screening my wife was in #Mr.Monster. Now the feeling of longing sets in.
Ill wait for minecraft on ps3 for the rest of my life T_T
Buy Throwster, get swanky tees.
Loving the story of Kevin Clash! Thank you!
PLEASE LIKE our new #Facebook page at www.facebook.com/fifeflowers! We've got deals, trivia and giveaways!
We doing it live at tomorrow night! Be there! We go on at 11pm! $5 if you're there before 9pm.
Everyone can pick up a phone to bitch but no one can come visit me or ask how I'm doing? Doc said not to stress. So far, not so Good.
i just took a chill pill. It should relax me......
any specials for MDC students?
i've hit every edge case i never wanted to know about. I should not wind up looking at the AST impl to try and figure my gdb stacktraces
Cuddling right now sounds perfect ... *sigh
make me one pweeese?! I have your bracelet!
signs that the insanely cheap bluetooth headphones purchased from the web are somewhat questionable: instr, chap 1: "Gettin started"
ayye you applying at my work ?
wow. that was fast. thanks for the posting. i really enjoy your blog.
but what about the algorithm? ;)
Switching twitter accounts to
Anytime! You as well. :)
Perused 15 recipes (ARGH) for grilling lamb chops on the parents' grill this wkd. Delicious, but didn't come out as hoped. CC:
What we know is that the card club has been the subject of an 18-month investigation by the state bureau of gambling control.
Typing in a captcha on a website and it asks me to type 0HfkMe. Seriously? What is this site trying to tell me?
happy birthday!!!! :D
THE KNICKS SUN IS RISING ...THE LIN DYNASTY....INSANE
Thank you so much for following us at Inner Gate Acupuncture!
Spurs lead by 8 at halftime.
The Fault in Our Stars, Empire of the Summer Moon, or The Warmth of Other Suns.
Where you at
in general? Or for being cowboys and hippies? Or for tweeting? Wither the mockery?
I agree with that remote admin with ARD would be easiest and least invasive for iPad. Now to find out how to buy apps.
My phone died before the end of #ctlc2012...more tweets to come. :)
Elvis passed all the #cpaexam!!! Congratulation love
Congrats on the recent essays! Your comic diss inspires me. Maybe I'll offer comic assignment for my students. Cool stuff!
Congrats on the funding! If we can ever help, please let us know!
thanks for the suggestions! so many good films playing can't wait to check them out
Sunday Dinner, Scrabble and Pot with the Peanut Gallery. 3 Days Off! No speak of BaoHaus for 72 hours =)
Yeah I just favorited my own tweet, I think it was THAT clever.
If they have achieved self forgetfulness, the impulses generated by fellow actors will feed this forward, moment-by-moment movement....
Ha! I heard she bit that dog 3 times - 3 TIMES ! Sheesh....
My UCLA Extension class loved your lecture. So looking forward to release of ur book: Wired For Story!!! (shameless plug so what)
anyone home??
i live in hell
lol congrats to you girl i just saw that.
bonnies gave em a hell of a fight at the end
she's passed out right noww!
Currently in the lab making a few minor adjustments.
What a story. Absolutely amazing
It'll be like watching The Super Bowl with Twitter comments!
Going to a puppet show w/ Livy & &
Haha I'm right there with you! :)
"He's a 27-year-old overly philosophical blowhard." "So, like you basically." "...I'm 23."
Thank YOU!
Whew. Taxes done.
Good luck
Powerful graphic design helps get results; it’s the perfect combination of form and function....
Rise and Grind!! Send us #ff !!
Book is coming out this week...thanks for waiting.
There is nothing that wastes the body like worry, and one who has any faith should be ashamed to worry about anything whatsoever. ~G
I'm on a Silent Retreat at a monastery. Finishing Scags at 18 caused this need, read www.sullivanstpress/publications to learn why.
That moment when you laugh to yourself about you said awhile ago
Just joined Myglam. So excited
thank you(: I feel special lol
Assistant captain.
That pic is my fantasy football avatar. Oh, and thanks again for the interview in 1996 for the Arizona State Press Magazine!
Lots of interesting stuff on twitter. Too much. I may get overwhelmed here!
Say it ain't true cuz baby I need u
I'll be the Bain of your existence!
Say it is in South Austin please, please, please Val from Kyle
#Irene is pouring rain on Washington, DC - the worst will come tonight and tomorrow morning between 3-6 am. Be safe!!!
Today has been a peaceful day.... Thank You Jesus ...
Of course! Do you wanna email it to me or u still working on it? My email is if you wanna shoot it over
Therefore, the Bob Dylan song "Lay Lady Lay" should actually be "Lie Lady Lie" :)
Ok so I got 45 mins
'urban affairs are no different than other kinds of news"
Back to for some commercial decor. #video editing on deck.
We are all artists. These nets are driven by 'illions of artists,doing their thing,whatever it is. An auditorium-a comment from audience
yea I think she also changed her pass so her co-owners won't use the account with her! She's a very pathetic person, latterly
At the vet to get Boo's stitches out. He is one happy camper. Enjoy the weekend.
I can't stand prideful people, get the fuck over yourself.
Do you live in the area? I would like our meeting to be more personable than a phone convo. Fri/Sat evening would work.
what i followed to and i didnt get ANY! D:
I cant wait!! do u know like when they would probably come out with it?
Madhuri Hedge at #ACMGmtg giving good overview of #DNA sequencing including #NGS. Breathtaking to see how far we have come in 10 yrs
100K!!! I smell world tour!
You know it was a rough night when there's a 32 ounce Diet Peach Tea Snapple on my desk.
Good morning :)
I'm Being Forced To Go To Temecula -__- Ruined My Night, Thanks Alot Mom & Dad
Super-ruby-nerd hangout with has begun!
haha really? They are kitchen knives though
thanks! I appreciate it! :{) I really need to text u more often
Thanks for the fab review, Kari!
In need of some new ink...
hey girl!
Zuzu is participating in a Dress For Success program this evening.Very worthwhile program.
Omar Suleiman, Egypt x2019;s New Candidate, Represents Old Order Omar Suleiman, former President Hosni Mubarak x2019;s intelligence chief
"You're...pretty...and smart. So pretty, so smart!" that was funny lol!
I have the best girl friend ever<3
RT RT A real man treats his girl with respect at ALL TIMES no matter how bad the situation or relationship is.
Hey do we know if there will be an L.A. premier for SWATH? I have feeling it's a no but thought I'd ask :)
What are marshmallows made of?????
DTST (Danny Thomas Spit Take) LOL w/ my coffee!
Girls with trust issues <
dang man. I go to get something to eat and when I come back, Carolina is bout to get bounced
She apparently came out.
Mayor Stanton announces imminent end of bus strike at Phoenix Green Chamber luncheon - with vote this afternoon.
So true. I keep expecting that hash tag to be a photo link. Then it isn't.
I think nude photography is a beautiful thing when its tastefuly done. I would like to take some for myself but please dont tell my mom lol
Love live life
Providing #Sales reps & Business with a #Mobile #Marketng Platform that reaches ALL mobile phones, not just #Smartphones -
nice meeting you today. Sorry I was worthless.
Happy Hump Day! 😏
If you don't feel love, it maybe something(s) you need to change in ur life
The start of another long day, but I've gotten one thing accomplished already! TGIF Everyone!
Just heard ftom DOT they tell me that it doesn't look debris fell from any of the bridges they inspected.
this soundtrack though? "n-word" galore! just..
We had a great weekend !!! Can't wait for this weekend!! We have a lot of great things going on this week! #deals, #denver,
awesome post. This is exactly where quora and quora off spring are headed.
Growing Green with us, provides you with with an incentive! Check for the incentive at the Front Desk!
LA, Sunset boulevard, Pacific Highway Out to the walk of stars now you in Cali. OFF TO CALI. CYA CHI-TOWN.
cheers to an alum!
Okay amateur photographers, the 1,000,000,000,000th close-up photo of a flower has been taken.It's safe to move on to other objects now.
haha! no worries, fill out your form and turn it in to one of our reps. we like Android users too. you'll still be eligible.
i missed u to and not much here bored out as always O_o and single lmao and u! hows life :D
RT“: Throwin a party friday or saturday dont know yet”<<<im commin!
If the #Pirates take 2 of 3 from the #Phillies it is officially OK to get excited about this team.
YOW don't forget, just wanted to make sure!
Mother's Bistro or Veritable Quandary “: My mom is coming downtown to meet me for dinner after work. Where should we go??”
Guaca mole mole mole!!!!
great you beat it
I appreciate the BF'S concern regarding my allergies to his sister's dog. I would appreciate more if he warned me to medicate ahead of time.
mentions load ppplllleeeeaaaaasssseeeee
Pretty sure Rose from Titanic makes me wanna throw up
thanks, bro.
Why do girls/boys that had a middle class upbringing try to act hood one minute and then classy the next... doesn't work that way.
Pissed and tired
Tierney Fairchild on #turnaround: We have got to talk about race and poverty. #edleaders at SREB Leadership Forum.
First session today on Leading Towards a Greater Impact. Offers a chance to share the great work of the team !
refurb/academic discount/5 finger discount
Introducing Timeline - that bad idea you're super pumped you never opted in to.
i haven't been on twitter in like 30 years omg
I keep playing with my mohawk lolol
Thanks for the link! I have added it to my instapaper!
i love classical music.
we all have that on person who is always there for you when you need them.. unfortunally mine is in ireland
I just differ. Because I don't beg for my right to disagree with anyone.
#PleaseTellMeWhy whenever I get #Drunk it makes me think of ?!?!
welcome to MKE!
BOOKED IT! We start rehearsals on Tuesday :)
Just watched Survivor Series never thought Fink would make me misty eyed. Thanks
Vegas market: 191K SF Rental units 174K Apartment units 427K rentals vs. 390K owner occupied
Stein: we are technologically not there yet. He notices all the duplicative devices we carry.
Law of Success #11 Concentration. Focus on the subject most needed. – Napoleon Hill. Next law in 4 hours.
Hey the Elinor was awesome today!!! I'm liking all the changes you're making with the food and decor!!!
- haa haa we played summer time in the LBC last night at the pool party.. lol..
woot! you go girl! (you may or may not need some coffee)
Dedication: MY SON, Hello, my beloved son. You are missed. Dad
lol that's so weird I was saying for everyone to follow me on instagram, your twitter name is my instagram name :p
At the 'local' nail salon this chic is loudly telling us all EV-E-RY-THING!!! Its TMI right NOW!
Ugh, so sorry but I don't speak douchbag. Better luck next time.
If I have to get up and face the day so should the sun
Al's Seafood 1551 Eastern Blvd. Essex MD 21221 we just keep serving those hot steamed crabs are you next?
Fourth Suggestion, Men are visual creatures by nature so ladies keep this in mind when you plan a romantic evening together.
Goin thru these new tracks... I'm lovin the new sound!!!
Lol that hoe EYE BALLS ABOUT TO POP OUT HER HEAD LOL THEM BITCHES BUCKED LOL
agreed, they really messed that one up.
Just did
I'm a bad kid and still surviving.
Sadly, he got out of it.
sick at my stomach looking at this news coverage... please pray for all those effected by today's weather and the rescue teams.
WTF RT : Guess who's pitching for the Padres in tomorrow's series finale? Soup!
RT #ThingsYouMayNotKnowAboutMe I tend to get shy when I'm around somebody I like...
The Standard has long been an enthusiastic arts supporter -- I'm so glad you're working together!
Seattle - it's much too nice out to riot.
so excited for the play tonight! I hope you're ready for your superfan! :D
frustrated at the moment.......wish i kud have a conversation wid my Granny.... #butIcant :'(
Everyone else at intermission saying "Isn't Syd Lieberman great?!" too. :) Such a treat to hear him again.
Yes yes! Design lunch soon?
Want to be a more powerful storyteller? If you''re Vegas -do come if you can to today's session pavillion 2 at 9:00 AM
The Prince and Me <3
Congrats from the EverFi team here in DC! RT : officially everfi certified!
I stole those too! I'm never going through the regular checkout lines again!
Are you "homesick"? Good to see you are rumbling round the studio, though!
Wow, I was sleeping so hard that when my wife woke me up I asked "who are you?"
On oovoo with Kelly and Laura
I've posted his work before. Love his Benjamin being pursued by a bear. Gordon & I have emailed w/one another. He's witty.
Like Jesus, many believe they will be resurrected from the dead. Unlike Jesus, they don't believe they have a cross to die on.
another day got away from me, perhaps I shall paint this evening....however, it is Friday....
Fun fact for the day: trampolining has been an #olympic sport since 2000.
Join us Monday – Thursday after 7pm for our 7 after 7 Menu! Visit our website for details!
I just have to accept the fact imma be late to work
So tired...i could use some
#3WordsForYou you're not cool.
Honestly, about to make a run for it
uhmm... yeah, so we got this instead of #Muppets and ?!? This choreographer hasn't even been to the movies this century.
so cute!
Movies done, and so is my live-tweet of #Incredibles. Thanks for not killing me.
Shameless plug (but also totally true): Bin Laden's Bald Spot & Other Stories, by Brian Doyle. It's really good. Want a copy?
Big Bands, Snow Storms, & $7 Unlimited Mini-Golf All Day, Oh MY! Check out WOMhouse.com for more details about fun on LBI TONIGHT!!
Ha, good one. Thanks.
I'm about to wrap up #CMLbookchat. If you want to join the discussion, you are welcome to chat books with me anytime! See you next month.
The concrete slab has been poured, construction is progressing nicely!!!
Can I join?! Count me in.
I'm ashamed to admit it, but I liked The Chronicles of Riddick from 2004.
Digital Camera Pistol Grip/ Handle for Canon, Casio, Fujifilm ...
He does take a turn tweeting from the account. They rotate which muppet it is.
Your stupid little text msgs frustrate me & put me in a bad mood for the rest of the day this is why we ain't together...JERK
There's so much more that I wanted and There's so much more that I needed and Time keeps moving on and on and on Soon we'll all be gone
Got a new CakePHP project launhin this week... Stay tuned
Wait... uncle is going to fight Cena? #hardcore if it runs in the family, he'll still be #Rams LB 30 years from now
Does Jaden Smith even have an album?
#socialmedia day everyday? Of course...but when do we socialize face2face? :)
Bored someone should tweet me or DM me! (:
Walk up in a room full of strippers, all eyes on me.
I love that little kid!
Sometimes you feel like a - sometimes you don't.
Another cold night ahead... FREEZE WARNING until 9am Saturday.
went big grip a la huh?!?
yup its packed in the bong
What is in my throat? Get it out! No time for sinus pain.
I need a pill that can just take all the bad memories away. Help me forget when all I can do is remember. I want to not cry, not be sad..
just got home & now making myself something too eat & you
thanks for the retweet
We are going to be pulling inventory from our store and making record bundles just in time for the holidays. More records for less money!
": wise words ;) “: #WhileInARelationship trust has to be there”" ohh well you know...
I second that!
Suggs' injury could also open the door for LBs Sergio Kindle and Albert McClellan I work their way onto the field
RT One away from the 200 follower mark! Help! Shout me out! I don't bite!
I was fixing Ramen Noodles and I broke the plate I was using to drain the water from the bowl. I screamed out FLACK! and my mom was like WTF
i am def. done with you you tlk alot of sh** behind my back i see ! i wish we would have never dated .
Crimes against the English language. #1 in a series: "Uniquely Different." (Headline on a transit ad for a Seattle area casino.)
Awesome side dish to start the week ?! Chop zucchini , lightly coat grill pan w/ extra virgin olive oil and salt & pep. Grill for 15 min
- Thanks for the compliment! I will continue to look forward to your posts.
speaking of starbucks where has my lil bucks been?
eww whatever. I thought we were friends. Punk!
RT : Today marks 101 days to go to the #London2012 #Olympics. Stay tuned for a big day tomorrow!
1 test down 2 more to go.... today is going to be a long day!
It's sad that desperate housewives is ending tonight forever
Angrey Its My Lifestyle Not Just The Mood Im in
Please don't let this be an end to another good frriendship. :/
to be clear, I have a FB account. Logged in, no probs with facebook. It's on that last step of the FB connect authentication
no but huge fan! been to tons of games. my aunt works there, my cousin went there & its 10 mins from my house #govalpo!
Getting ready for our #interview! #newmediaweekly #webseries!
#wordoftheday Bedizen (v) to dress or adorn in a showy, gaudy, or tasteless manner. /// Use in a sentence! Best on read @ 6:50am on 91.3fm.
We are ready, come on down!
. I just want to know how this many kids got @ least 8/10 questions correct with one hundred pages unread.
doggy nightmares are so funny to watch! i can't take it though. i always wake up the pup. :(
Thanks for the Love!
Anyone from Croatia?
When the wind is at your back, it’s not always easy. Don’t worry! God sometimes comes in the night and all things become clear.
that photo is a little large dont ya think!?!
don't make roofus do all the work now..come on get out there!
it looks like a robot (:
Awww, you're sweet :) My head's spinning, for sure...
I love you! See ya tomorrow night? Yes? Okay. :)
how are you homey?
OH EP!! YOu are a dear and I adore you.
About to head to the office...
Kinda wish I knew who fake is. Even my son followed her by accident.
do the stanky leg
:I just purchased this app but it seems to be one that will be very helpful and easy to use..."
The hardness of the butter is directly proportional to the softness of the bread
Google guy mysteriously suggests that I double down on Google+ starting right now. "but I can't say why. Just trust me."
Playing TONIGHT at Friends on 6th St. 11pm!!! Oklahoma Showcase!
Can’t wait for the new music bro!
Late to party, but congrats!
Thanks for the recent mentions and RTs. Have a great day!
Double Celebrity sighting! Just walked past & then a few blocks later
None of the carriers websites have the iPhone 4s but you can pre-order from apple.com. Curious.
it was Dowe NOT DAVE
RT : Chase Deel is so ugly
Why do people keep flagging our Craigslist posting???? @$$
This courthouse blocks Facebook but not Twitter.
I think I've sampled too much Easter candy..I'm wired..I've eaten so many sour patch jelly beans...that I now have no more skin in my mouth!
Stay safe my friend. Keep the family close.
fucking heard that
I'm a couple bands down, and I'm tryin' to get back I gave the other grip, I lost a flip for five stacks
In what universe does and the Washington Post not want war with muslims?
glad I spent all night chopping wood for the fire.
- oink flap oink flap - well I'll be darned!
": i will NEVER Be some nigga's Baby Mama . !"
"Now I'm finding truth is a ruin. Nauseous end that nobody is pursuing."
just sent out the quarterly test alert for our office. yay for hearing my corny voice on 100's of phones....
Open today from Noon-8p. Stop by to check out Project Einstein featuring the work of Burmese refugee high school students in the city.
tuesdays suck. A days do not. so lets get this over with
Hater are confused Admirers
no prob. I just need some estimate ;)
If you are looking to attend a great Easter service tmrw feel free to check out with Erika and I tomorrow at the 9am or 11am
Winter Roses to bloom. Big date January 13. join the party!
SOME 10 YEAR OLD IS ASKING ME OUT on facebook cause he saw me on younow.. supposedly im hot. lololololol hahahahah
U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Thomas Nides traveled to Islamabad, Pakistan on April 2-4, 2012....
A Messge of Hope Cancer Fund Benefit and Auction Gala May 7th 2011, 8pm to 12am. Register at www.amessageofhopecf.org
okay god ! :) thank god !
I am going to let everyone know I died through Draw Something.
that's an easy one. Good luck.
Hey Happy New Years!!! hope you had a good one. I went into Boston for new years cuz thats where I live. hope u had a good 1
Pawlenty and Bachman, two idiots, very disappointing!!!! www.bruzzesiforpres.com
Chilling with the bros
Ice cream and French fries wit a fat ass burger early lunch for this long ass busy day
Busboys French toast, maple syrup, eggs, bacon, pineapple, strawberry, berries. Best brunch in the world. Patio.
I am sadly lacking in the hug department right now. Gonna grab a few of my cats and trick my teen into hugging me.
And your Green Energy SCAM to pay off your bundlers & handlers & donors don't need our money either. It's called CRIMINAL!!
(Not so) fun fact: allergy seasons are expected to get worse thanks to climate change. Misery...
God's timing is always perfect!
Always happen to pass along good stuff. Very nice work.
- I hear they wear armor to dissertation defenses :-) I wonder if the same mindset is going to pop up after this Depression
Did you get your free pancakes at Ihop today? You have until 10 pm, so there's still time!
Happy Bastille Day!! Anyone studying abroad in France?
#2ThingsIAppreciate and my cell phone.
We'll send you a bill for the backboard you shattered on that layup attempt tonight, hell of a shot, keep up the good work son.
Use this beautiful weather this weekend for some inspiration.
"I love classic objects/machines that work and never go out of style—my hammers, my anvils, my old typewriters." A good man.
In TIS meeting at ESU10 today.
RT : *mutes halftime show*
Better than "misplaced quotation marks" RT : Lately I find that I am adding too many exclamation points where they don't belong!
Verdict on : an excellent film, A+! Joss Whedon pulled it off; Stay after the credits!
Worst test I have ever taken in my life.
hell yea it will be like friday all summer we wont have no jobs shit to do might as well....
Everyone has that special someone who is always on there mind...admit it.
Haha. Not a goal. Just a coincidence. I'll try to retrain myself if you'd like.
Horseshit call in this #ND game.
Watched Chopped last night and it made me hungry. so at 10 pm i made a meringue. why? guess i felt like expressing the culinary side of me.
Can't release my sex tape because an animal was harmed during filming :(
thank you ! They are adorable babies :D
Remember: Your children get only one childhood. Make the most of it :)
#INeverRead Lord of the Flies or the Old Man and the Sea. Somehow missed out on them both in high school.
Thanks to my coworkers for voting! RT : Congrats to our Rock Star of the Month !! :)
I think alot of us dudes are used to seeing that, but hey those relationships never last in the end so no worries!
I really need to sleep, But i wont since I have another life called Tumblr cx
I ate potato chips and ice cream for dinner. Unfortunately, it didn't make me feel any better about life.
Atop Mt. Fuji for a great time
Headed to bed! Gotta wake up at 8am to help roll eggrolls for a baby shower tomorrow, then heading to Stockton!
Thanks for lying...again.
Im Up idk why
I like the 9" Elliot as well from the Petes Dragon combo!
indeed, he stated that directly I believe "she asked if the friend zone posts were about her. Adam told me to say yes. I did."
RT : Did you know that you can brew your own beer at Hough's in Greenfield? Copper Kettle Brewing Co. is now open!...
check out graham lindsay, joseph huber, and william elliot whitmore.
Downtown watching the game with thedy bean and some friends!
@ POV in a interesting Film Workshop! @ NYC
#summeritis waaaaah. Second wave of midterms... It's just not happening for this girl.
QualysGuard delivers scalability and automation to IT security and compliance for customers and cloud providers
it wasn't bad. Just very out there hahaha
You know me well and all my twitter tactics. Just can't even come up with a good ques to ask...
I love you! do not forget. C:
I love the paranormal field and can not wait for our next investigation :) yay! I am so on fire today lol
Do not feel like working today smh...
It makes me sad that people don't send out Christmas cards anymore. Used to be nice to see something in the mail besides a bill.
Just watched Ramona and Beezus. cutest movie everr. is the best!
I hate people who hate Austin Mahone! :O
I've got 10 more years before I get to see films I'm interested in.
LEG CRAMP LEG CRAMP!!!!!! DANM FEILD HOCKEY TO HELL!!!!!!!!
A bouquet of roses can really make your day.
Hey , did you love life on the big stage ?
RT: ": I have come terms with the fact that I will always have the handwriting of a 7th grader."
People don't know about the things I say & do, they don't understand about the shit that I've been thru.
Fuck it I'll clean my room.
Looking for midlife tips for the "Happy Happy!" Dec This Midlife Thing Mag. Dm me with your best Christmas memories get a mention in the mag
I always start my tours of the archives with a look at the old space in the basement first. Makes the new 3rd floor digs more dramatic.
Every time I make it to the gym in the morning, it's like a total triumph of the human spirit.
Thanks for following!!
Saw #wetheparty at #USC last night it's phenomenal! Thks to for answering my screenwriting question and sharing your art!
I love that feeling when you tell someone something they didn't know and they actually think it's interesting. Ex: and
My band Oracle and the Mountain is playing tonite at the HiTone special guests Sperra and Andy Fleming.
Hearing about digital outdoor with of Lamar.
whose tryna hang out today?
This is true.
Look at serious ways to reduce landfill. Reduce dependency on coal. Increase recycling. Cut costs of waste disposal.
Younger children are most likely to be abused or neglected: 34% of all child victims were 3 or younger.
Needs to stop sending me text messages about her home improvements and start tweeting about them instead!
So jet lagged!
How many of you have tattoos that are quotes??
NJP just received our first copyright claim on a video. Clear mistake of YouTubes audio identification. Will be blogging about it soon.
plus it is the most gorgeous sunny day!
it's my 6 YO nephew's birthday present that has gone missing in the post, I don't want to keep him waiting much longer
Procrastination is the art of keeping up with yesterday. - Don Marquis
Screw the singing! What about the schnapps?? Lol
Baptized. Went to church. Waiting for the sancocho to be made now. Then onto another fam gathering.
Another hit welcome to the encore! See u tomorrow!
Practice what you preach.
My grandma just texted me. I guess she finally learned how
Fun! Ours was a good one too -- made it worth looking even though we only got to see that one!
Newark New Media Innovation Lab: Meetup #2 Tonight. Hope to see you there. (BrickCity Coffee 6:30)
btw i wont be doing at the crime scene lol tonight so dont wait up hahaha
“: #MentionTo your future husband.”
Its def a great for some #nfl #football!
If my mom implies that I am fat one more time I am going to scream.
Yeah definitely, hit me up! Still jealous, but have fun and have a drink or many more for me!
Happy friday the 13th scaredy cats
Here watching district 9 alone
sweet! what course you taking?
sounds like a blog post!
new office space.
In the time of chimpanzees I was a monkey
Brand new song almost finished!!!
The whole world is at #zonamaco12, students, entire families
Too long!! Who has a time machine?? RT
after the crooked hat stabbing they made some changes.
Dude. Stop teasing. Not fair...
RT : I have a record produced by that I will be releasing soon.
plants means LIFE, thank you for folowing us.
Been There. Done That. Has the Shirt #NappingInWorkChairs :)
#20ThingsAboutMe I mean well. Trust me.
This game reminds me of the Packers-Broncos Super Bowl.
I love you
In class. So fun
thanks nate :)
wouldn't want to make an ass out of u and me. And by me I mean
gotta cover "dirty old town."
In Wisconsin we are scheduled to have 80's in southern part of the state and a frost advisory in the north. Come visit! We have everything!
Blessings to all students, teachers, and parents starting the new school year. May you dive into the joy of learning and growing in all ways
Goodnight, Mr. Schaub!!!
Can't believe all the comments and love Jobs got from everyone but not 1 single mention of Dr. Dennis RItchie?
is off to Westfield Century City Apple Store to check out the line for the iPhone 3GS, not buying, just scoping out the scene
Today we celebrate Heather and Jamie's wedding at the gorgeous St. Paul's church and reception at the stunning Casa Marina Resort!
That awkward moment when an ugly person says "I need my beauty sleep"
If you're watching #tiger rule #ArnoldPalmerInvitational on NBC, stay tuned for all today's sports highlights w on News4 at 6
Close as I'll get to you, Kasia!
On the road with OA 2012. Good times, but wondering, will I ever not run sound for a group from NCU? I need to graduate sometime...
Rick Santorum wants us to "dig our way to freedom." (With Walmart shovels made in China.)
Money talks mines says bye bye
I am with ya on #FridayFail - my alarm didn't go off - yet I still got to work early? Weird.
#tweetyour16yearoldself Go to school for something that pays better than social work....it is too important!!
Let's do itt!
I feel like cooking ._. The closest i can get is Ramen so, Ramen Noodles &Hot Sauce. Ftw;* .... i miss talking ........
RT : And . is having a banner day. POTUS just mentioned a hashtag
Why We Broke Up, by Daniel Handler and Maira Kalman
There's a 78 degree day in the 7-day forecast! Andy has the details on Good Day Oregon
only four variables to play with for any service your archives provides: volume, quality, quantity and budget for that service
My mouth is watering seeing the picture. That salad is so damn delicious. Go back tomorrow and have one for me please!
WRIT on breakout watch...
So not blowing the whistle but intending to and blowing the whistle are apparently the same thing. Wow. I wish life worked that way.
Nothing stays the same...thats the part of the game she forgot about....~ con ~
please follow me!! Love you <3
Yea it was real cool..
Big day for Ian Darke, calling Chelsea-Arsenal this morning and now Real-Barca
come see #rocktheink's official Ninja Lili & the fabulous www.rocktheink.net for details. see you Saturday!”
Super excited about the show tonight at Who else is going?
RIP James and Lily Potter is trending right now. Lets celebrate a real hero instead: Juliette Low, fndr of was born 2day in 1860
#truth I feel like you have to "be born out of something" for long term success.
OH OK HOW LONG U GOING TO WALK
he don't even gotta help with the bills? Lol
Ham-it-up skillet
I'd share if I could!
It's WR399 Graphic Novel. CRN 44287 Once a week on Fridays.
Italian! That works perfectly actually... I'll be driving in from UMaine. Want to say 7pm?
RT IF YOU THINK ELI IS ELITE!?!
GoodMorning people of twitter:)
Ever know it was going to be one of those days before you even walked through the door??
Dude, I felt horrible about that! I didn't mean to get her busted! My bad.
does anybody in pensacola florida know how to do some hair
Slice HD, hint of the day: If you run out of fingers, slide one off a blade and quickly across the red button, it works great! Try it.
That would be nice, we're working on a farm kitchen project as we speak, when that happens you'll have to film here. :)
I love yaoi so much, so happy my copy of Sekai Ichi Hatsukoi came in the mail. I can swoon over cute anime guys!
To make my point dear that you have my heart.
it would seem Apple is not fluent in yiddish...
Welcome to the party, my old friends!
Join Free! We're bringing COUNTRY MUSIC FANS together from all over the world... If it's Country it's here!
Fabulous party at the Strawberry Creek Inn last night. Most of the cast was there. Yea! Rodney's cookbook is beautiful. Breakfast awaits!
Hooray! More Gay merchandise will be sold in Memphis! #MakeMoneyMoneyMoney!
CONGRATS Thanks to I met my first goal 8 days early! 20 pounds - GONE FOREVER.
Thanks for following me at twitter!
Happy Monday! It's like 105F again, crazy hot!
Girl you killin ‘em, my condolence
International #Jazz Day Jam Session at Jazz at the Bistro starts in just 2 hours. Come sit in and show us what you've got!
No, Oh, this is the first I heard this. Quite the phenomenal talent and charmer. So sad!
Event and portrait photography. On sale right now. For a limited time.
and Poe's music is awesome!
The online catalogue looks great! I visited in 2009, loved the exhibitions, and went home w/ a Nevelson-like brooch.
he just enjoyed seeing Shaq get tripped/mocked/not called a homophobe
Especially in women, the skin of the arms is highly sensitive to manual or lingual stimulation.
Oh, great, the Crosstown Classic starts today. Because I didn't want to stay away from Twitter enough.
ah thanks! You coming to Baton Rouge Saturday?
VULTURE BAIN CAPITALIST only helped themselves and DESTROYED everyone else. This should be MITT ROMNEY campaign slogan. It's TRUE. NLD Mom
Happy Thursday. Up, moving about and excited about going home this a.m. After angiogram and single stent Expect more energy and passion.
Shoutout to for doing amazing today on her solo <3 So cute.
I love working out, it makes me feel really good!
There have been two craigslist missed connections about my roommate on two days from different people. I'm not kidding.
I'm so pumped for Jack White tomorrow night. Who else is going?
15 Critical Components of a Senior Leader in Today's Environment sharing the details now at #Strat12 - very insightful!
Mini twister night!
The Lorax movie was so cute!
Lunch with eight Bostonian women is the loudest experience of my life.
is the ultimate bro!
We talk to the main force behind the hugely successful #AnaheimLadyDucks ... Also take a look at the
sounds like is in fine form:)
Your new website looks fantastic and is easy to navigate! Great job!
“: People understand you CAN lie but the truth is the truth. No matter what. You can't lie to yourself.”>>yes!!!👏
RT : We've done ourselves a disservice by focusing so much on our ability 2 verbally, & not visually, articulate ideas.
My guess is that the facilitator did it for attention. I'll have to watch further. Felt sorry for the brother.
I'm ready to be slayed!
welcome to Las vegas trance movement!
Where my pgh bloggers at?
Naomi is yelling out the door saying stop it to the rain! LOL
That's the problem with getting attached to someone...when they leave, you just feel lost.
My parents stayed together for forty years. But that was out of spite.
I don't like when people get taller than me
SLEEVES RECEIVED: A collection of album artwork from submissions to The Wire magazine. Inspiring.
my money is on cold wings at the lunch meeting. i wanted to puke just smelling that crap.
TBD. Ill keep you posted!
RT : They can see every man's bald spot and down every woman's blouse. THAT'S why giraffes are always smirking.
iPhone > Android
Bellevue has played a stronger schedule by being from NKY! Different brand of football up here.
"If I'm going to watch a movie here, do I need to check it out first?" Me: "Um, no?"
I wish we could start over
I'm out of shape and need to lose some weight, but i dont think Dr. Oz and his Raspberyy Ketones are the answer, just saying..lol
thanks. i am too -briana
Thanks for the follow!! I agree, Girl Rockers should unite!! ( :
Emma! These fools don't have good reading comprehension.
Going out on a date with she is taking me out to dinner for my birthday. So blessed to have her in my life.
hell to the yes
Im gonna get a black t shirt..that says i like cheese on it...cus... #iLikeCheese :D
Facebook appears to be down again.
Sledding hill and warming shelter will open Saturday at Madison's Elver Park. www.cityofmadison.com/winter
Good Morning Beauties! Life stands before me like an eternal spring with new and brilliant clothes. -Carl Friedrich Gauss Enjoy your day!
The # symbol is called an octothorpe.
and that is possible. But first they would have to vote to change constitution.
mean!! I miss Selena :(
you making the #dusky trip this year?
Hi Hooligan! Oh what a cute picture U have of 4 UR background. Please follow back. Thank you ♥
I'll sell you my Graphire2 for $300. You pay shipping.
i can't stop listening to secret secret dino club!
Playing DJ at a wedding 2nite. Reception playlist includes MJ, Diana Krall & Willie Nelson. Yep, the bride's got eclectic taste. Love it!
Wasn't there no lyrics? I heard Triumph & it reminded me. Maybe Boston?
if u go online n play a quick gm it will upload ur rosters n i sent u a friendreq my gt is datwork 210..
Shanon appreciates fact #Mitt also doesn't believe in civ unions bc its same as marriage & bc of #Obama's #ssm decision is voting for
You're very talented. Not everyone can grow a posse :)
thanks for asking;) you're so nice. Jeff is truly blessed with a great family and he's a blessing himself. Ttys. God bless.
Perfect for Easter! Thanks...D
Going to miss you too Joanne, looking forward to the Three Amigos all meeting up again in Nashville ♥ ♥ ♥
I hate giving sum1 ur phone # over da phone & they say "uh huh" during it making u have 2 go back & repeat #s. Just listen 2 da whole thing!
My 4 year old cousin dumped water on me yay......... >.<
hey emma!
It's about time I go to an #Indians game. Will be doing so.
Many Koreans use gigantic Samsung Note phone on Seoul subway - massive 5.3 inch screen. Never seen one in the USA
HI I JIST SAW THIS TWEET. Stop reading my effing mind, I'm wearing a dress tomorrow too! So we're taking pictures k bye 💗
Led Zeppelin cover!! Fuck yes! www.wimp.com/michaelwinslow/
You tell me that you love me, then you go and leave me.Why you do this to me?
omg hahahaha stop!!!!
Wondered more about your thoughts as a Humanist. Like you, I have not been on Twitter long. So far, I like it. Cheers!
My mouse isnt working
you inspire me in so many ways that you have no clue! Ill never stop trying to get you to follow. If you see this follow me
YOU ARE MAKING ME CRY. My voice is cracking . :c we miss that too Alex </3 #ShootUsDown >>>>>>>>
its unfortunate. So are you heading to bed soon?
It's just stupid on their part. I'm not sure if they don't understand how explosive this Sanchez-Tebow thing could be.
Thank you. :D
Man man man....
crazy old people are awesome! Reminds me of Betty white she is so funny!
WANT MORE FOLLOWERS? GO FOLLOW SHE FOLLOW BACK (:
you should def. order it. I would watch!
I swear to GOD if Jacob Bearchum does ONE MORE "that's what she said" joke...
Raging Waters, San Jose is now on Diversity Platinum! Get a $10.00 Discount per person with your card! Diversityplatinum.com
somewhere along the line I stopped talking about art & starting talking true connections. I may have lost my audience but found happiness.
Yup im done tryin
That's very helpful. Thanks! Keep us in the loop about any data collection, research, or reporting you do re: new D.C. grad rates.
I <3 the update so much.
Wiz khalifah can get it. If I got high
forgot to do a chore -_- haha. It's just for a day. I'll bring you one thursday if I can.
Do any of the Boyz wanna be back on ABDC? Shoutout to Idella.
#RyanKennedy is a young cancer patient whose dream is to trend on twitter. Help hin out and RT
I think I'm ready for what's next.
#Mayweather by decision or late knockout.....hm
Late for 10:30am practice? RT Flight delays and cancelations looks like I'm finally going to make it out of here. Portland bound
Goodnight Cody! Love you!- Eva. xo
Just saw in vegas at , they are covering ground across the country fast!
Was just tsk tsk'd by a girl when I said I have texted and driven before. I said, vagina doesn't tsk tsk me unless vagina wants punched
haha text me
I don't know
I Missed You.! Did You Get A New Device.?
Who remembers the Naked Brothers Band ? LOL
lemon chicken, broccoli, mashed potatoes and corn bread.
No matter what mood I'm in, George Strait always puts me in a better one!
Friday the 13th is the day to attend to see !
check received and deposited. Thank you sir. Lookin forward to the show.
Using 3d printing to build low cost housing for the developing world - Ray Kurzweil
Damn traffic. I just want to go Home and sleep
So far it's been worth the walk! :)
Tw'eeps, ever have one of those nights where you just keep thinking of things that you should/could/would do instead of sleeping? Eep!
#Salute & #Follow him -> RT Still up in studio working hard! Got another session in an hour
Day two of Byron Stripling's residency. We're visiting lots of great schools this week!
Are you attending the Dunwoody Business Expo Tomorrow? Come see Prestige Travel at the Expo -tomorrow 21Apr- Crown Plaza Ravinia 1pm -4pm
Movie marathon Sunday!
sweet. Who you taking?
Wednesday's words from the wise: "An intelligent man is sometimes forced to be drunk to spend time with his fools." --Ernest Hemmingway
are you up to some cool stuff in LA? Hit me up! I still want to write a profile about you.
CALLING ALL MODELS...STREET BEAUTY ENTERTAINMENT OS HAVE TJE FIRST MODELING AUDITIONS APRIL 1st. Stay posted for further details.
Check out my website, cool stuff! www.lisaschicboutique.com
Well, does it? If not, perhaps this 1971 movie about marijuana's sexual secrets will change your mind. More » Post from: TheGloss
Thanks following !
me, too! next time, i hope...
Does anyone have $10,000 to donate so that we can have a Thankskilling party in Poca
I hope u feel better
I'm getting sleepy smh
Thanks for not hustling easy dunk
Just got back from Fabrics where a sweet older lady gave me her extra coupons and it saved me lots of $. Made my day!
I gotta run and finish dinner. I'll talk to Laurie and get back to you.
2011.07.07 #Brewers 5 #Reds 4 | Brewers back on track / take the lead then give some back / Axford rides the edge
Specyphi. What you believe.
8.3 left I'm biting every nail possible lol
Watch this space tomorrow. I'll be co-presenting at a 1-day conf on Twitter in higher ed. #TwSIG Jump in or flee. Take your pick.
good for you! talk about inspiration!
When your 16 month old baby is sick, sometimes a seseme street marathon is the best medicine.
Great to see so many Lori Compass homemade signs on I94
thank you for coming out! glad you guys made it home safely. see you in AL nov 6th? :)
Glad it's open! I've been waiting! RT : Friends checked out Roseangel in Gordon Sq. Described as upscale, casual taqueria.
RT : What u niggas buying that's making you struggle while making 50k a year ---$50K ain't much esp if u have kids cc:
RT Speaking @ UNC's IVCF tonight, if you are on campus, hope to see you there: 7 p.m. Hanes Art Center 121!
The Hunger Games. AWESOME!! Damn, missed the very first part...
Didn't catch the first airing of our ADDAMS FAMILY special on MPT? Make sure to watch it tomorrow at 3:30pm!
Watching Magic City with Viggle Sat | 9PM | Starz Edge Get real rewards just for watching TV.
Back up in 5 hours.
I've built a wall. Not to block anyone out, But to see who loves me enough to climb over it.
It's crunch time, positive self-talk can help. A word from the encouragement lounge for #adultlearners and
Hold up. You're at the game?
Congratulations to for sweeping up at the #grammys ! Classy lady:).
Keep Calm and Love 1D.
doing some stuff for the US dept. of transportation and national park services, but basically unemployed :S you?
Estimated Ivan, morning from the Canyon. Best winds to also ours Insurgentes Ave. Peace and dreams windwhisper....
I'm always losing followers.
Just because you're covered from head to toes in designer labels doesn't make you fashionable. It shows you have money and NO STYLE!
I love the home visit episode of #idol, it give me 'goooosies'. :)
Got a good viewpoint on social networking in the construction industry at the ABC Young Leaders event tonight
Sound editing like a mo-fo!
Have fun tonight, fellers! We had a blast at last night w/ the Bangorians &
Space mountain is hands down the best ride at magic kingdom!
Come to track C202 to hear how we implemented Drupal 7!
yep hes off the friend list......maybe
aamber and Kavah u guys make the happy sign!:)
No brainer, let's go KNICKS!
Haven't seen my friends in a week, so glad to go see them again <3
Great win for Manchester City today. On the road against a worthy opponent. Playing like
don't pretend like you goto the gym bum
Thanks for the follow, Chris! Come check out the band at Plush on Th, March22 along with 3 other fantastic female led bands.
gimme those lights!!! lol
That is an interesting connection, for sure. I hope I didn't sound like I was trying to take away from that fact.
dude, I told you I cut it. I'm like buckwheats mama.
sure thing, love your stuff!
He's guarded Dirk well over the last couple years.
Sorry! Was that your door I knocked on?! I jokes...
Uhm this whole "Money over everything" how about GOD over EVERYTHING .
yes, it does. will make sure that list gets updated.
loving this video!!!
great... soo rt u yet and officially
its game day baby, we open at 5 boo
just rocked the rock test
yep, they r dealing
“: runt the whole thing” lol that crazy talk lol I ain't trying to get tired
haha yeah :p Oh well.
A potential 3 point play results in only 2 points.
I'm sure he would be! :)
If you wanna get a good laugh in come to #TheHutch at 6 tonight and watch me plau outfield and hit... havent had an At Bat since soph year
#StrangeFactsAboutMe In 2006, i was featured in pics/articles in Ebony and Jet magazines. Yes, me, the whitest guy you know (waist up).
'Where is the Halloween Party?'
gonna be the best day eveer <3
Pomegranate vanilla oolong iced tea latte with soy? #yesplease :)
What a great idea. My kids also got a book--I think it was Click Clack Moo--in a Chick-fil-a meal a while back.
Unlike everyone else, David Stern was not wondering how the #Lakers would hang in this series...he "knew" they would.
Hating it doesn't make it any easier to use. It actually makes it harder.
Danny Brown on terrorist threats
thanks for all you are doing!
WOW, ? JEALOUS! My Dream Job is Nice to tweet you, fellow writer.
AGT is weird this year hahaha
How interesting. Not only a horrible actor but a hypocrite. How long have you supported child rape? And those who allow it?
Thats that shit that drives me crazy.
how did u see my tweet
PLP's Freshman year at TU is in the books! He's back home safe and sound and ready for some home cooking!
I sympathize with daily LA commuters. Fuck all of that.
I know exactly what I want, and I'll never stop going until I get it.
self-retraining is probably the only way to overcome problems with lizard brain short-circuits.
Hmm, nice tart acidity transforms into sweetness, almost candied-apple taste? Sounds good! Come visit and we can try it!
Thank you.<3 I know, things at home have been wacky, but things get better. I'm glad things are getting better for you. :]
And without our best player! RT : My team is better than your team. Period.
Hope everyone had a wonderful day today .. anything good on tonight ?
Our calendar is updated, posted album reviews, chose our show of the week! Whats your show of the week?
very pretty color lil miss Shelly :-]
Can't believe you're 32 weeks!!! Grow, gnomebaby, grow!!!
Watching a movie and eating chocolate frosting by the spoonful. Only thing that'd make it better would be if were here w/ me.
Seconded. Thinking same. ": Wow. PBS "American Experience" documentary on Bill Clinton just ended. Fantastic."
Reverse Happy Hr 9-close... $2 off all alcohol & small plates. #HellOfADeal visit Smitty, Lori, Dan & Robert.
The more you work now to get incredible at your craft, the more goals you'll achieve quicker. You'll also stay on top longer!
Watching some old guy shake is ass while walking, perfectly in sync with what I was listening to... Modern World Christ. Haha XD
can i get an f u FB?
I never have any profound tweets, so let's all just play track 1 of Bat Out of Hell and enjoy the guitar shredding
get to Vegas
I've become such a patient person. It's kind of exciting
Sitting in on the interview committee for a new SLP for my district. What questions would you ask?
Ht = hat tip, as in, "I'm posting this with a tip of the hat to _____"
Nice to get a residuals check in the three figures! Instead of those much more common two, one or even zero figure amounts.
Doing the all night long thing for work or pet emergencies is much harder today than it was 20 years ago.
opens new dealership in Chicago
This year sucks already!
My phones not white anymore 
I was just served the most measly burrito I've had here. 1st time in 10 years as a customer I've walked out the door hungry.
like i love the fact that we're graduating soon but the thought of it is so weird to me? i feel like it's not real.
“: Another successful #mobileIndiana event. Thanks to and for hosting it. thx 4 coming!!
santorum and bachmann make me sick, who are they to tell us how to live?
Father John Misty: so much of what I don't like about Hipster music. You dance like you shouldn't. Stop trying way to hard.
hej tell Anja to check her work email! :)
do u hv ppl come out to perform?
If I dare. Tonight, I HATE it. Maybe someday I'll like it enough to share. Are all writings this manic? LOL
Tons of unhappy people out here in the Bay Area
Sorry for confusion, iPad contest was extended until week 16. Keep up the good work. I believe you are in the lead right now!
Don't Tell Me To Do Something If You Not Going It
is my fricken idol. Love that # 15.
I talked to my parents &they said I can donate some of my money to help the ! It Feels good. #showyourhearts!
awesome! Thanks for the tip!
It's going to take a billion years to board this plane
I'm trying to finish up the scarlet letter. Then I'm going to read hunger games
Yes. Put it over the trailer hitch and make that the clit.
CONGRATULATIONS!!!! So proud of you...new "mac-mommy" - LOL!!!
I'm the biggest iPad hater in the world
LOL....dont worry. It's just the person who runs the College's Twitter page. You are safe.
Farmers Market today. 11am-4pm. Across the street from the North County Mall. Farmers, Food, Friends, Family, Fun. Happy Mothers Day!
I don’t care about your past. All I care is to know whether there’s a place for me in your future.
#Compliment u seem really chill and cool (:
Late night crafting. All of the sleep I got yesterday & today has my body confused, so I might be awake for awhile.
FOLLOW BACK??? pLEASE!!!
Lake of the Ozarks will be a much needed break, for sure.
Two men taken into custody as a result of the stand-off on Lawry. Press release with booking photos will be out in a few hours.
On this day in 1800 Congress approved a bill establishing the Library of Congress. I've used its collection; God bless Congress.
NO ONE LOOKS AT MY WEETS EXCEPT FOR MONKEY!!!!!!!!!
That's code should be used online. Let us know if we can help in any other way! We'll see you tomorrow for the Globetrotters!
Fwd:
Loving the inaugural #Reston #Energy #Security tweet up! We're "getting the party started.
It's sleepy-tea time
salon talk (++), but the physical setup of confs & panels drives group dynamics and learning? it is a Q.
Friend REquest me on ASW Inner Circle? Stephen Samuel Santoro
Got me thinkin RT How aloof and uninterested a parental figure must usually have been for someone to grow up deeply charming.
Just saw a Pro-SOPA ad. Not impressed. Must remain vigilant or this garbage could still become law.
Remember the best leaves early just like Daughtry. Let us know when your record comes out!
It's highly saddening that I'm going to miss tonight's Clippers game due to work. Damn. Why can't I get paid to write about sports yet?
we will habe fun
I've been out of my Twitter account with a few technical difficulties. Last night I got back in to the #NewTwitter, but I miss Tweetdeck.
Happy Easter!
hitting your campus today!
the #RHONJ reunion cannot come fast enough...i've been waiting all week!
Perfect. And to finish...'smallows, whipped creme, sprinkles, chocolate shavings, crumbled candy canes, a gingerbread man.
Ladies & gents OCT 19 is hosting a "Girls Night Out" & celebrating Purple R.E.I.G.N
Enjoy your weekend and facial/massage on Monday!
GROW UP BRO!
#20ThingsAboutMe I dont like my dad . He threw away his life . c;
all giddy less then 60 min till long weekend!
We're still cheering for you, ! We wish we could do everything for every fan too, but sometimes it's just not possible.
Wow - mobile is never dull - thank you CTIA for extending the Awards deadline ;-)
Our waiter said there are 3 things the dog barks at: bicycles, music, and gypsies. It can just smell them & runs out of the shop
Im so excited is finally back in the u.s;I can finally be awake at the same time as him; so mayyybee he will notice me now 3
YOUR AVI IS SO CUTE
Clarice is that you????
...hello, Dallas.
you really like them don't you!!!!
Off twitter for 11 days, coping with work & a flu of great longevity that set up shop in our house (& still won't get its ass out.)
Muy buenas tardes a todos! Good afternoon everyone! Have a blessed day!
Talking down to people is NO WAY to get them to look UP to you.
Now that is very true...very true... some seriously lovely food here... love southern BBQ.. yuuuummmyyy.. now I'm hungry :)
Hey, I never met you.... And this is crazy, but here's 's twitter... So follow her maybe? ;)  1
#1DVDForme because there's nothing MORE THAN THIS that I could get & I WISH you'll retweet this& I WANT that DVD
haha why thank you, i'm honored
o I want one. Great post!
RT : CSR (Corp Social Resp) is great BUT personal passion & purpose is key not just to attract consumers but to grow orgs
West bangin new mix tape on the way bang at me
Cool idea.....let me think about that!
Company moved our volleyball league mid-season because the teams were showing up too drunk smh
A good week to plan. Making a strong start to 2012. Thanks to tremendous support from a large village of people!
Gotta find some fun ways to de-stress. A hike...eat cupcakes...surfing...
I feel like making hot tea right now, a tea party to have with my daughter, shes been feeling iky today so hopefully that will cheer her up.
I would really like to either star or guest star in that TV show, Southland. I know I could portray cop or perp role well.
RT : VIDEO: Africa Channel & African Ancestry at New Orleans 2012 #NABJ12 Register for a chance to...
“There are two types of sacrifices: correct ones and mine.” Mikhail Tal
Working on client projects and such - loving it but I don't get to many events now. How was it?
I get so upset and emotional when I see these chicks on Basketball Wives always pickin on the pretiest and tiniest girl who cannot fight.
re 'political posturing' - only true in era of last couple decades when parties have become more polarized.
ANSWER YOU ARE AMAZING!!!!!!!!!1111
Let's go #ku. Go jayhawks
i dare you to learn how to dougie with no pants on :')
Drew: do u wish those rat finks lose even when they play the pens?
lmaooo Kenny off the chain
ELLO BETSEY COULD I PUT U IN MA POCKET  >>>> #parisIsTweeting <<< FOLLOW ME PWEACE!
Signed Or Unsigned,Major or Minor, Music Is My Life.
Two+ hours delayed at O'Hare. Day started at 7:00am. But my crew just had us do a wordscramble. Elementary style.
1 paper, 1 quiz and 1 test to finish before fall break! Time go quickly!
With how fast tweets back after finding a amex synch hashtag, they are definitely using the streaming api....
check the quote ha
RT : S/O to and the whole team! #THETAKEOVER #APRIL13TH IT GO DINNNNEEEEEEEEE!!!!!!!!!
Ah crap, here comes the head ache.
Since when is that news?
Which doesn't make sense; his main other language is French.
Really need to fall asleep earlier :P
Roads on Muldoon to Bartlett, Oklahoma and Boundary are fine.
The Zagat Survey of Washington, D.C., lists Firehook Bakery among its Top 10 Best Buys reflecting the best dining values in the survey.
trained like when u train a dog to do new tricks....Ariel roll over... lmao
I'm enjoying the latest issue of The Public Historian! Articles on state history as a useful framework, NYC & upstate.
For anyone who forgot caffeine is a drug, I invite you to see my Pepsi-ed children.
It sounded like a bat. Trying to reach my aunt for an update....
lucky girl! full report with pix, please!
sport? Sarah I hope you're taking a study break, because your brain seems about fried right now. 
listen fam I didn't bring up the co-ed intramural league I won way back when the towers were up sounding like
RT RT : I'd like to see an atheist athlete thank the cold relentless chaos of the universe after a big game. // lol
#5bestsmells that new shoe smell
Be careful what you wish for because you might get it and it whinds up being something you don't want!
RT : I know, it's terrible. I'm hoping to change that. On a side note: I'm concerned about McCarter's lame duck session.
On May 5th, 1862, at Battle of Williamsburg, General Longstreet fought Union forces under General George McClellan.
#Facebook rolls out its new Timeline Profile tomorrow, some say long forgotten comments made in the past could come back to haunt you
I'll spend forever wondering if you knew
NO WRAPPING REQUIRED! Gift card purchases are 15% off this week. We can mail it to you or to your the person your giving to!
Haha anything other than axe. Axe makes me think of Eminem. Men need to learn some class.
And Lykke Li! RT : Adding to my playlist now! RT : Listening to today, it puts me in such a good mood -ZS
how many days till the Catching Fire movie...???:)
could fly you to mke so we can drive to az lol
Heading home from hot, dry Phoenix to hot, humid Dallas.
WILL YOU PLEASE FOLLOW ME IT WOULD MEAN SO MUCH I LOVE YOU!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
a mcdonalds paycheck i bette than not having no paycheck
i knw i have not been tweeting for a while coz i was having something called fun;;)<3!
This. x100 RT : Going from TNT's halftime show to ESPN's is like going from Disneyland to getting brutally beaten in prison.
!!! RT : I can't front. I love when the Lakers are losing lol
Thanks to and the rest of the creative team for an amazingly productive weekend. Gentleman's Rule is ready!
Hes finally happy now =) its a nice thing
Sixers became the 5th number 8 seed to upset the 1st seed in NBA history!!!!!
a nice dinner with a good conversation and maybe a good body rub..............
going to make a Twitcam? Xx
See there, that's called logic.
Such an amazing opening night! Love the cast & crew!! Can't wait to do it all over again tomorrow! (:
Our friend is always unpredictable. One of the most creative, talented, and menacing minds in the biz!
How you know where I'm at, when you haven't been where I've been. Understand where I'm coming from.... Cypress Hill
just had to answer some "Truth about you" questions. I love that everyone thinks I would key a car in revenge. It was a yes, every time!
On my way to Louisville for the Spring Game...gonna be a Strong day
..loved The Descendants! Wonderful flick. That George Clooney is going to be a star one day...
It is a pleasure to make your acquaintance as well, good suh. God bless you too.
about to go air on Power 92.3, interview w Beyonce Foxx just after 7pm....tune in Chitown!
finally we meet! It's great finally putting a tweet to a face. Keep up the good work!
Please help save the Dunk Contest!
REMINDER: Family Medicine Grand Rounds TODAY @ NOON in Gorman Auditorium. See you there!
apparently raven symone is dating the girl from milwaukee who was on ANTM this past season. get it, get it milwaukee sista!
Thanks, will do!
Even sadder that he got noticed by OLIVIA WILDE and you tweeted about him. :D
There is just something wrong about an 8 year old wearing high heels.
Don't have words for how mad it makes me to try to handle family biz & be told they* have to talk to my husband.*cable, insurance, bank, etc
NEWS: mid day host on 97.9 the Box in Hou has been added to the bill for the show. Artists annoucements start tomorrow!
Ultra bar. Good start.
It's a sad day when u mix coffee Patron with milk.. *hangs head* I'm not proud of myself right now
Thank u
I hate when there is nothing to eat at homee. -__-
irritated that there is mushroom in my veggie maki roll. Mushrooms != vegetable. Picking out as much as I can, mushrooms are my enemy
About time to go to the orthodontist, gah i really don't want to :'''(
Or maybe I just scratched myself into blood loss to my fingers.
Yo Ted! Thanks for the follow!
Yeeah. It Made Me VERY #Salty -__- And Thanks For Replying ! Follow Me So i'm not #Salty Anymore ? (:
If it's up to the same standards as the root beer is, then I'm sure it's amazing. Beer and root beer are two of my vices. :-)
yup and Onyx decided to sleep on top of me lol
I hope all the people who were angry and protesting a few weeks ago do something productive today and vote.
Kinda disappointed in j. Edgar....
You mean a professionally trained dancer won Dancing with the Stars? What a big surprise...
I Can Honestly Say Things Are Going Good <3
"Woman Crushed to Death By Midtown Elevator, 2 Others Injured" - right next door to Fluent Praying for the family of the woman who...
Donna, We Love to Love You Baby. You'll be missed. Your music will live on for generations.
Al Qaeda Alex....Al Qaeda likes Antz over A Bug's life.
that's an understatement!!! “: the rose ceremony uncut takes FOREVER.”
Last night got me very excited for #HFF12 - looking fwd to work by
good work bro! you and Kodid are gonna be great parents
im pretty good! :)
Conrad Murray guilty finally we have justice for michael Jackson. We miss & love you michael!! Nov 7 2011
Perfect cuddling weather!
psh, I can say whatever I want, she doesn't even know how to use it. Help her son!
IT WAS AWESOME, even though I told you that today.. haha
Thanks to everyone who participated in our Rio Sanctuary contest! We will announce the winner early next week. Happy Saturday!
your welcome :)
Is Draw Something a real game because I want in!
A.Peña: I use hands-on/inquiry based teaching so my 8th graders graduate thinking like scientists.
Watching the Home Chopping Network.
A: Unwise for state universities to rely on state safety nets with old law - can still be injunctions and criminal proceedings
follow (me) & (Kayla)...now Alix just needs twitter lol =) -Patience
Morning! Have a beautiful weekend!
endorsement deals... so damn ill...
Maybe the Campus Center?
Stupid twitter won't let me tweet
Oh I hope that I win!!!
CORRECTION: #Arsenal best team in all of London.
burger king waiting on you
A tradition like no other: Eating and drinking a lot on Easter.
Listening to Shake Your Rump :)
cuz we love greatness
Good group of guys!
If you enjoy my tweets, please let me know about guest post opportunities on your blog for executive #leadership!
Don't take a permanent action based on temporary feelings.
So glad Im here to entertain the family.
Go like best clothing line in htown :D
I can't drive, smoke, and tweet with my left hand. But I can with my right.
W.beyondthescoreboard.net congratulations to drew brees for breaking Dan Marino's yards record!!!
We are gearing up for what will be our biggest summer yet! Do YOU have friends who want to join us this year? Tell them to follow us!
ill ask Joel lol
Yeah, sometimes seems the F3 gets a bit overlooked, still seems solid in certain environments
Its very frustrating #PullItTogether RT : Dodgers can hit Giants can't . Were destined to lose a lot of games the way we hit
I feel so old
will be opening for M.C. Hammer at the 12th annual "Gathering of the Juggalos". See you there, ninjas.
#bestlovemovie The Titanic . 💜
And just so everyone knows- those are RIGHT in front of my desk.
Jacob beats my boyfriend in the whole trust/ kindness thing. That's fucking sad!
This Plies got me at work tripping. Turning the Ludacris Soul headphones even louder forget it. TGIF....
Come see us at The CANTAB LOUNGE in Cambridge tomorrow night with our friends SWOON! Show starts at 10 we go on at 11!
The Indian music fraternity came out in impressive strength for its first-ever multi-genre awards ceremony on the 10th.
Ah, good to know! Hoping he comes back for 1 more...or 3 more.
I look forward to it.
Wait 'til the #Castle fans find out--!
I hope wins AMERICAN IDOL!! He is soo good!
hook me up wit that Taylor Gang! Hahaha
We often wonder what life would be like if dessert was served first. Hm.
The problem is that people follow orders instead of dreams...
Just Obama campaign.
don't know if I could ever be, without you coz boy you complete me <3
thank you so much
In pain and then I get to progress reports-_-
With faith, letting go of a dream doesn't mean giving up. It means accepting God has better plans for you. Sweet dreams, everyone.
Today, Savage Garden and Dido played back-to-back on the radio. What have you done today?
I am thinking I will be in Indy the weekend of the 19th. Please tell me you will be around, and we can visit??
These #GreekConfessions tweets are killing me lol
my favorite place the Palace of the Fine Arts.
The ability to force people that talks way to much to be quiet!! Awesome!
I vote for Daniel.
Todays Top Story! Romney drops out of race. Takes a job at Long John Silvers.
hilarious...well done sir
Need to restart West Wing
Nights like tonight I think about what it was like to live in Wisconsin 5,000 years ago
a little late but - WOOOOH LIAM 3 MIL
that's good(: and no problem.(: <3
Excited for #BigOmaha tomorrow! Give me a shout if you'll be there.
I cldnt hear anything bc I was at the gym! I felt so bad for the gators! Apparently they eat little kids!
": Z-Bo bro"i agree
The think like a man movie is going off
its on the 17
...I BELIEVE IN YOU. YOU CAN DO IT. ...if anything just sneak up on stage.
April is #OTMonth!!!! Show some love for our Occupational Therapists!
Pleaze checkout OUR MUSIC VIDEO!!!! supra-My dreams Are our dreams. We're twin rappers..pleaze check it out!!!!!!! Thank You!
Black Forest Cake, deep rich and drenched in the highest quality Kirch on earth. Yum! Hits the counter at 4pm. #Belltown #cake NOT for kids
Watch out! ": That scares me . . . RT : I'm going to crotchet and bake my way in to your heart"
Just wrapped the short film Infatuation. Another quality film with a great cast & crew. I'm 4 for 4.
Class acts ready to reboot Irish economy
fuck it, we just need a ride!
The Music of Mexico concert has been rescheduled to June 4, 7:30 p.m.! Watch the web site for updates! www.huellaslatinasconcertseries.com
summer starts around june 7th
NFB welcome to Twitter
maybe if my bagel had been been g-free this morning, toady's twitter would be more exciting for ;)
Flawless now is said Shaw-like.
The other thing picking up Rudy Fernandez means is Deshawn Stevenson is out in Dallas. Now accepting apps for new Mavericks tattoo guy
Kids that blame their actions on their parents not being around or on a horrible upbringing <
While @ wk last nite I saw th ugly truth of my own flesh an immediatelly discovered I hv no excuse nt to wlk & live n th image of Christ.
wait I left that folderr with the digits at my house text me por favor!
Just had a test in speech for stage where we had to flutter our lips for a 12 count! Cmon on now!lol got an A ofcourse ;).
Off is the direction I wish you would fuck.
I just need your address!
Watching an #Insanity infomercial while stuffing my face with chicken tenders dipped in honey mustard. Irony.
Loving the healthy options!
I agree, 100%. Grant has a warm spirit, and true compassion for the clients they are asked to help.
that is hysterical.... Lmao
talking to my grandma!
because you should text me instead.
TONIGHT: Said The Whale with Say Goodbye To These! Starts at 8pm.
So Nick Perry is "soft" and has "no motor". Great. But he can't be any worse than Wynn, Wilson, Jones, Zombo, etc
Elejah is my favorite Elena ship, and I don't like DE and SE (At least not anymore). I ship doomed pairings like a boss.
Shit crazy RT : yes it is
Yum.... A great place for a cold or hot drink. Check out Taco Friday's and great soups/sandwich deals too! I Love this place!!
great pool of talent here M,) lots of growth here in the Pdx market ,) let me know, I'll give ya a hand,) J.A
The sleep was glorious!
is a MANIAC!
That or she dont wanna have sex with u RT Silence is a girls loudest cry u can tell shes really hurt when she starts ignoring u
wish they could be
for my new followers: please don't forget to follow for #hr and #hiring information and job opportunities!!! =)
What Do You Like Inna Boy : )
My daughter and I were just reading a Marvel Adventures:Avengers story together and cracking up every other panel - DvL
This is the official Twitter of SECO International, a provider of continuing education for eye care professionals.
it's sold out! Great for you...sucks for me!
The epic 2010 Wimbledon five-setter between and Nicolas Mahut.
I'm off to get my fishing license. Yes, you read correctly. Sunday is "obligatory semi-annual father and son do stuff I hate day."
how are u like 18 something but look like ur 40
That is Jack in the picture, we adopted him and he is wonderful. He had some medical prob but we sorted it out
Tickets are $25 in advance online or at the bar. $30 day of. Over 15 beers available and live music starts at 8pm!!
Do you have a projected date that we all shall meet up
": Mike Letizia: HR should understand the business side of the company in additon to HR side. #SHRM" Impact of healthcare costs on biz
u da sexist girl I seen on so far 4real
20 min on hold is still a tremendous fail though!
More great stuff today: Digital pubs, workflow tools, e-books, apps, CMS. We are changing fast around here. Exciting and exhausting.
Young broccoli sprouts hold super-antioxidant sulforaphane at least 30 times greater then other known antioxidants!
They didn't want 2 hurt people but were capable & they weren't afraid. They were awesome, moved like lighting, & stops without sliding.
What a day! Morning meeting, 3 afternoon events throughout Atlanta, and judged a fashion show this evening. Looking forward to tomorrow!
Some take the next step forward. Some leap forward. Which are you?
O. M. G. I just died inside. *yowza*
GOT FEATHERED!!!!!!
Heading to base camp in April. Would love to hear some stories and tips. Eric
I'm auctioning my authentic Mel Ott signed baseball '37 NY Giants, incl. Chiozza, Ripple, Moore, Bartell, Leslie, others...
I totally care too!! But they're cute and strong:)
- curious....is it better than a laptop? seems like the main consumer need that it satisfies is the need for a new apple toy
So happy the Flyers were eliminated. Not a fan of Jersey, but kind of hoping Brodeur wins one and goes out on a high note.
haha my dad is the exact same way
Pistons' owners selling the team. It's pretty much inevitable the team will find itself in another city. Kansas City, Vegas, get ready.
You're so welcome! Enjoy
we need a guy that can fit with zbo and Marc. I'll package OJ, Rudy and Conley for deron Williams
Tonight's Warriors-Thunder matchup will be one of the featured matchups of the NBA's first-ever Chinese New Year Celebration
In a lot of corporate and legal environments Skype is not allowed.
I am living abroad in Prague. I had sex with two sisters last night after I told them I was from Brooklyn. MLINY
that was a fascinating note-to-self :)
Thanks for the shout out ;)
Wed or thursday will be first day..will tweet the night before
So really cutting the fuck up today on my TL!
My brother originally had to work today so couldn't come up. He got someone to cover his shift& now he's suprising my mom. Shh!
Win a Happy Black Friday Cake! www.blackfridayhaul.com
I hate when people Say "nobody like the lions when they were 0-16" duh nobody like a losing team
Xcel energy getting on top of the power outages...out of a total of 33,000 customer without power earlier today, it's now down to just 1,600
only time he's woken up before noon all semester was for national signing day
FB messages now tell someone when you're ignoring them by telling them what time you viewed their message. BE WARNED.
well why don't you?
Dear Webby Humor Letter Blog
In Orlando..so ready for the water rides.
In LA with the babe!! wedding soon!!! :D
today was quite a draining day... glad that's over.
Watching Egypt events live with Al Jazeera English iPhone app on the bus home from work. Incredible! AJE has seized the moment.
sorry. saving the world from other evils. i'll get to yours eventually. BTW, are you still asexual? If so, might be longer.
I finally understand Tumblr! :')
I'm oblivated from happiness.
It's my jobs to make myself happy and my mate .
a #CLEfood #FF to and for helping spread the word about !
For some reason I used to hate Evernote... just gave it another try and it's awesome! Maybe because I didn't get all the capabilities?
Tickets to the games, please!!
James Gang is ordering some!!
Driving across town to find a dunkin donuts that has a drive through so we don't have to do a walk of shame in clothes from last night
All you need is 5 minutes a day to work on your dream for a better life. Make the time right now & stop the excuses!
Heading to Plug & Play Silicon Valley incubator (graduates include Paypal and Dropbox). Any questions you'd like me to include in mtngs?
I fucking miss my friends . I hate everybody at fucking glades !
this is true. i might just do it myself, although some staff might appreciate hearing it from someone else.
RT Please help save these cats! Feral cats deserve to live! #saveloewscats Boycott ! Pls RT!
Pleased 2 meet u Meredith. Thnx 4 the follow. WE're following u & Would've loved to attend that party.
Almost to #Seattle -- I'm kind of loving that #Amtrak now has free wifi!
Amazing Day
I had it done and I accidentally hit the delete button and ts all gone. All 3hrs of it. So pissed! I don't remember the answers
Zoo Zoo Zoo, Prom Prom Prom!
This whole shop is beautiful.
Take a bite out of child abuse! Visit , , , , & during
thank you pops!
Check Out My Friend Loren's New Musci Video with The CoEdz! She has always supported me! Time to share the love!...
hahaha oh my gosh too funny!!!
congrats indeed! i'll congratulate Fritz on their excellent selection next time i see him
not much. You?
apparently boxing makes you more ignorant than the average bear. You can only sell so many wolf tickets before you get caught.
#cara student Chandra C. secured a position as a Room Attendant at the Union League Club ()! 41 of 310!!
This means Michael Bay is changing April O'Neill's last name to 1st. RT I looked it up too, all the article dates say April 1st
Cabo would be pretty sweet. Assuming it would be really expensive. Getting a tan is an underweighted commodity.
Built To Spill @ The Fillmore
Yeah man... the "Best Day Ever" video is so good. makes some great music.
I see Bootsy baby!
I was calling Mike's phone for 40 minutes straight.
Apps for apes...wtf HLN! You got monkeys playin wit I-pads now?!
This was a great deal three weeks ago. How did people miss it?
. says customers generate 20% of content on Dell's web pages. He predicts it will quickly grow to 60% #scs11 WOW.
I'm making it! Slowly but surely. Hopefully will start seeing significant improvements soon..kinda tired of it!
I like watching documentaries. Especially the good ones.
Beth, I just signed for up for 's Get Yourself OUt There at Stanford Online; let's compare notes.
no, the Dalai Lama doesn't either.
Akib, Max, Vivian, Jeffrey, Serina, Toma, and Chaimaa. But apparently Leo was creeping on mine.... -_- so idk if he has one.
Interesting to see the #ows tag shift from a movement to coverage of a trial...
Support Breast Cancer!!!! Make a donation or join my team!!! Team Boobylicious Babes!!!! Go to www.komendenver.com to register online!!
i love joel
I'll take that as a compliment.
Omg this crazy af bro
Do u have a good cop story - where a cop did s/t 1derful for u or a loved one? Pls share! We r compiling "good cop" stories 4 a project!
Prom girls at the salon discussing when they're going to be washing their hair this weekend. Is that a thing now?
Working on a story about where our donations go when we give to charities. How much goes to overhead costs? How much goes to the cause? 5p.
Plus I think a big time "Hollywood Gaffer" already lives there. Bonus!
": trying to come to either next weekend or April 14th" I'm ready when u r!
what kinda nigga would I be sayin "naw I don't want no pussy"
RT : Words to live by > "Create. Learn. Improve. Repeat." via
And thanks to and staff, it was great to see you all in person. :D
Comfirming, i'll forward it to you, right, a tired, so goodnight baba girl x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x ♥ ♥ ♥ ♥
RT : <-----will be keepin her ass in the house this summer...murder rate in Philly is gonna soar...smh
We're thinking about trying to sell out the first #Orioles game back after the All Star break. Who's down? Not Opening Day, Halfway Day!
Producing an instrumental atmosphere to extend the end of one of Jeremy's songs on "From The Dust To The Stars" today, then mastering.
gourmet... #Survivior style!
thanks for the RT!
What did you think about The News?
Chris Carter! My ultimate favorite Viking!
about time
Thanks! Busiest day ever? I may have to change my plans:)
interesting would be the correct word, yes. ;) haha
Romney supporter... and now I'm thinking 'If you can't be an athlete, be an athletic supporter'
Playing Zork! Woo for text adventures!
No doubt, gotta shout out for spreading the word on yall. I've been working on my list for 3yrs! /Cc
yoooo!!!! Like I wish you could see what the heck is going on over here lol.
yess like this weekend!!!
Bosh is that important I guess. #Pacers can play though, legit TEAM
wah wah wah I stayed out til 4 am and partied like a rawk star and now I am working in my PJs at home MY LIFE ROCKS
If I lived in DC, I'd B a Nationals season ticket holder just 2 watch Strasburg- 97mph 2-seamer w/run, & a hook to follow. Wow.
come to atlanta,ga
Watching 106 & Park on BET is really making me want to go shopping right now. No joke.
Women r 20% more likey to do this than men are...What is it?
DARN YOU TWITTER AND YOUR SHORTENING MY TWEET x{ -shakes fist-
FinalCut Pro is no joke. Finger Puppet series is on it's way!
Ppr steve smith or colston? Don't do me wrong Burns!! ;) love the show!!! Thanks!
I can't wait for Alizee to be a croqueta on my beach!
fuck life. my shoulder hurts like he'll, :/
up north for the weekend... happy 4th!!!
Day 2 of the Texas Conference on Digital Libraries. Follow the conference
you make a good point,new trends in #socialmedia change so fast! There's always something new to learn every week.
why is it ok for some games to be released broken but when a rare gem like #ME3 exists it gets attacked because fans suck?
When you stop chasing the wrong things, you give the right things a chance to catch you.
Nah. Its that fire? But I was talking bout an R&B joint.
Omg lady. So you get ONE day off a week huh?
That would be cool! Maybe I'll see you then. right now, off to sleep! If I can!
This girl sitting in front of me in Pols writing a note to her boyfriend << Did I mention it says "Hi Goober"...
Exactly right! It's so simple, isn't it? Focusing on results is the cornerstone and the rest falls into place...
I'm jealous. But, if we would have gotten snow, I wouldn't have been able to finish school today. You win and you lose.
I've been seeing bunches of those tractors that the country fellas sing about. Taking up both sides of the road!
enjoying listening to Jai Vatuk...new CD.
In #Benicia gettn ready to c #Rob&Dionna make they big step n confess their luv for one another...THEY GETTIN MARRIED ..congrats n Blessings
Yeahh that's good. There was this one guy I STARTED talking to. It didn't take long to see his asshole side.
RT : THANKS! <--- loved all your designs! So talented!
At EKU Commencement Ceremony: Congratulations, graduates!
I guess this'll be a good test for the anxiety meds I'm on...
We're days away from the release of James the Brother of Jesus and the Dead Sea Scrolls by Dr. Robert Eisneman. Stay tuned for more info...
never could get into parks and rec. kinda like 30 Rock and office I like at first then it gets grating on my nerves :)
I totally understand you...good mood setter
ikr! ): its about how supposedly he stole the song.
This has been a good mothers day...I love Family
Insanity started today. This Fit Test and I have a lot of work to do...
Weird. I was at Applebee's. I dropped off my sisters car at Pep Boys at 1230, then walked to the nearest place that wasn't busy!
#20ThingsAboutMe I appreciate honesty regardless of my emotions.
Go Liz!!!! Space Camp should have a day named in your honor!
Thanks to #Fayetteville #Hastings for hosting my book signing today. Great people. Pick up my book there! A few hardbacks still available.
I'd love to tell all about it on #museumminute. Whaddya say?
#mostinappropriatethingssaid2me I would let you shit on me
Do I look to move to Chicago, move back to Milwaukee, or stay in Madison? I'm leaning towards Chicago.
holy cow - dawks win!
I don't know what this all means, but I'm hoping it works out for the better... (:
Movement is a medicine for creating change in a person's physical, emotional, and mental states. ~Carol Welch
#ChristmasShopping is finally done! And I'm packed for the east coast. I hate flying but hopefully #Southwest will be ok
Man its so nice out! I haven't had the opportunity to talk to you all in awhile. What's new?!
I will have to flip between the Mets, Yankees, and NHL hockey tonight.
Finding a dead baby bird on the roof of your car is not definitively a bad sign, but it is definitely not a good sign.
Merry #Krisimas! I hope this is the best one yet! You guys coming to Tampa?
Hm. Skydrive for Mac imposes a 256 character length limit on full path name. Windows limitations go cross-platform :)
RT : What is the difference between an obstacle and an opportunity? Our attitude toward it. Every opportunity has a difficulty
TATER TOTS where the premiere form of currency in the cafateria back in school days! Yall know what I'm talkin about! Happy
Im not tryna go home
it's good it's just that the days are going by quick😔
No prayer is spoken too softly to be heard. (Natasha Isabelle)
All men who have achieved great things have been great dreamers.-Orison Swett Marden
happy Orange Friday
oh I have one! It's in my brother's room!
OMG yes!!!
Wondering if you and your staff might consider doing a piece on tips for librarians and archivists looking to relocate.
Gonna be at the European Wine and Spirit Festival at the Sofitel Chicago 5-8pm. Pouring some premium Greek wines.
Probably top 2-3 clutch of all time.
to be clear, I'm not at British Embassy. RT'd because I used to work for the Diplomatic Service, like to follow former colleagues.
really good!! thank you!
turn on ABC family...
who's her favorite PF member?
Tonight, Chef Drew Dzejak of prepares Seared Diver Scallop Salad & Poached Citrus Shrimp. 7 p.m., Channel 14 / 32.
Going out to dinner with the little brother. Proud sister :'). We are having some bonding time together.
We'd love for you to share your old photos on 1000memories too!
aaron tv version 2.0 in progress
Can u please dm Justin my name ._.
Yeah! They host, we attend. :)
I've never set out to be different, I set out to be myself... I just happen to be very different
Early Saturday morning, my favorite time to create new burgers, anyone got a showstopper? Ooh, also don't miss corndogs 4 Easter tomorrow
The delicious Canadian hamburger photo-op by is making me consider a lunch time run to Five Guys.
“: Yep RT : so even the mascot has as many points as Gasol does? #smh” yay
Same pic and da name was close as hell SMDH
It will be three weeks friday. We are going home for three days.
Keep up the great work! You're well on your way!
At The Emerald Agency, we conduct a thorough and precise interview to assess your goals, experiences, and skills.
Almost to NYC! :) :) afraid if the giants lose tonight what the city will become
Ewwwww I was so jealous that you had the old ones too! You were one of the last of your kind lol.
Sorry, champ.
Fennimore looking for some insurance runs in the seventh with a pair of baserunners and one out leading Mineral Point 5-1.
#Looks like I could be playing a vampire again soon.it would be swell.#I'll start sharpening my fangs!##www.imdb.me/alexmontaldo
My fear is my only courage. So I've got to push on through.
AVID IS CHALLENGING.....LORD HELP ME...ALMOST DONE
Hmphh. People these days!
Anyone hate math as much as I do?
TONIGHT MARCH 31 "OZONE BABY' TRIBUTE TO LED ZEPPELIN Roc n Docs SEE YOU THERE!!!! START TIME: 10:00PM
get back on
Well. Here we are. Well, well.
I heard #smb26 was awesome and 's Media guru rocked the panel. Sorry I missed it.
Tell your mom i said good job & thankyou for blessing me with you. your such a beauty<3
Where is your favorite beach in the world?
Very nice lol!
Okay I'm drunk I'm fucking drunk
I hate that false hope one experiences for the microsecond after blowing one's nose - I CAN BREA-- ugh, never mind - congested again...
are you back home :)
#OilersQA Did you ever find that DQ?
Working hard on implementing a fresh & improved new interface designed by Super excited about it. Gonna be a GREAT update.
Sufi masters and others too talk of pain as leading to the Divine...
I'm flying to NYC the day the Hunger Games premieres! UGH! Wanted to camp out for the first show in a loin cloth, with bow.
RT : He who is not courageous enough to take risks will accomplish nothing in life. ~ Muhammad Ali
Books are the ideal solution to the dead moments when you have to wait and need something to do. Yes, you could listen to your iPod but ...
RT : My best moment of the season would be a tie between my first 30 20 game and the buzzer beater vs Dallas.
Im a
Just ran 2 miles with my pupadeus. I figured that if it was time to get into shape, it was time to get his tail wagging too.
we have this thing going on hoping something will spark soon enough! :)
Weekly Ketchup: I Am Legend Director for Catching Fire? This week's Ketchup includes new movies based on TV's The Rockford Files , the Di
#SXSW badge pickup time.
Alex Van Halen and Mike Portnoy!
Obscurity & competence - that is the life that is best worth living ~ Mark Twain
People blow me with their stats on FB.
Who?? Tell them to kick rocks!!!
looking for a positive spin on this and because we can't play USC in basketball this year I have nothing.
Exhausted from work, my weekend trip, dealing with the foreman and their errors. Feeling completely burnt out. At least weather was nice...
Sporadic snow, soothing songs, settling down to bizness of blogging (rachelzpetz.wordspress.com). Dogz Done 4 day.
it takes a hell of a man to handle that...congrats! Maxine was my g-ma's name whom I never knew and I will name my first girl max
This is not how I imagined tonight would go.
hi I'm such a big fan
i'll still talk to you on tumblr i promise :*
Get an Edge on Razor Manufacturers: 8 Strategies to Save on Shaving
In bed. Should be writing. :)
So...did you guys know that we're expanding? Because we are. And the archtitects are here. And it's super exciting!
omgshhhhhh, its Cinco De Mayo tomorrow... i gotta start planning my fake Mexican roots festivities!
Need an oil change? We come to you for a change.
I like #SenoritaBanana better! LoL! You should come!
I fall asleep for 4 hours I wake up and can't even go back to bed. :(
RT : Learn Another Language By Seeking Education Abroad - Study Abroad Programs There are many educational institutions t......
Anyone know how to beat driver 2 Rio level 7 for ps1? #stupid #distressed also I had #pizza for dinner which was
modern warfare 2 is beast but i have to wait till friday
Why is at my house and I'm not?
Five thousand is the largest isogrammic number in the English language. The longest English isogram is subdermatoglyphic.
I was elected by the women of Ireland, who instead of rocking the cradle, rocked the system. - Mary Robinson
Another great day of training for our athletes, #CopperMtn has the best early season terrain!
We would love to see you all this Sunday. It will be a lot of fun. You'll feel like you're back in
thanks thanks thanks!
I need to STEP My workout game up, have a good weekend my man!
So glad you were able to attend #cstweetup tonight Great to see you're on Twitter now=)
great meeting !
You and I were having PARALLEL LIVES this week! Could NOT get math resolvee until I'd charted out each size decrease!
n i know women from previous program n shes kind n considerate n not a stiff lipped academic. also she ll let me talk 2 PA prgram director
Doctors appointment :)!
Memories can't be forgotten that easily.
Youre chosen and selected to be first. Youre not an extra but a headliner! You were cast in this film before it went to production. Live it!
The Myth of Mobile Content Marketing
que paso ?
the sexual tension between and I is motherfucking palpable! FEEL THAT AIR SEX AND DIG IT! FUCKING DIG IT!
Happy Birthday to our talented organ and accordion player, Jason Federici!
#Justice4MJ (Finally Michael Jackson can rest in peace now) We Love You Michael..
Should just pour up and take a drive, lol
Hilarious! It never really leaves you!
lucky! what grade are you in? You're from NY right?
RT : A Southerner knows that "fixin" can be used as a noun, a verb, or an adverb.
About to drive across the US on Route 66 starting in two days. Woo!
thanks for the shout out.
Our pleasure. Happy Holidays!
Can't get your DM from Twitter. (!) Answer is yes! How-to or tutorial would be great. Send a proposal/outline, and let's talk!
good:) just watching American pie:P you?x
Senate considering HB1271 on 3rd Reading
I thought Goodell's violent hugs may inspire these young men to continue the fierce nature of the game.
Are you at this Hawks game, sir?
It is! Just added it to my queue! :)
My main reason for switching twitter clients was 1) stock is very very slow 2) twitter notifications come hours late.
just said, "I got a throat freeze; how does that happen?"
RT : That is a problem - G+ is early adopter stage. many of older donors/supporters are just now on FB
The #Bills have put Fred Jackson on the IR, so his season is over. Sad end to a Pro Bowl year.
I'll follow you too lucky colts land lol
Cleveland hasn't gotten off his back.
Did you know 2,079 #Americans are still #missing and #unaccounted for from the
to keep it real i never woulda left
forgot who said dis but he said everybody wants to be famous but very few people stay up til 5 n the mornin workin
LOL and roller derby! :) shout out from GB
Yep. That's the plan. Even more of an incentive to pay that high priced plane ticket. :-)
Follow my tweets,Is Hot related to Watch American Idol Online
People do not deserve good writing, they are so pleased with bad. -- Ralph Waldo Emerson
Obama's voicing support for marriage equality makes me feel like Obama & I were flirting for a long time and he finally told me he likes me!
Taping a live set at Ace Hotel w Trampled By Turtles - great players they are!
Today : , "biggest tech co by mkt val." Who would have thought back in,say,1993: "profit margins eroding...to lay off 2,500"
For deserving students from all backgrounds,the USC Mork Family Scholars Program will open doors not only to a university, but to the future
You're right that people ignore spectacle—but what bodies deliver content and what bodies deliver spectacle?
absolutely! Although I don't know if I want to see any of my old geocities creations some scary stuff back then
With Best Pic getting 10 nominees, any chance documentaries will get more?
um-that is NOT lisa Turtle! yikes!
I wish I could have made it down for more parm & pea pasta, but alas, 7 hrs is a long drive.
fans can be a part of the upcoming feature film Katy Perry: Part of Me! Check out Katy’s Twitter page to get involved!
the first ep I saw was the angel statue ep! #omg scared me half to death!
RT : Twin Peaks is making me crave coffee and donuts. Also, very sympathetic to the plight of Tibet.
Sorry for the delays but so glad you like it!
Is it weird that I rather go to the dentist than to the eye doctor? I'm terrified of getting my pupils dilated
whats wrong with that?? ;)
bro lebron is 6'8" 250+ and he's from akron Ohio ask bout that life
Because we are waiting for Joe Crede to come out of the dugout....I wonder if Ventura will just take over 3rd?
Cool buddy, I will DM you my # and let's grab some dinner this week if we can!
RT Aaron and I are expecting! We're so excited to add baby 2 to the family. // congrats!!
Despite that, we STILL nearly pulled it out!
the weekends just don't even matter anymore.
As usual, i agree with : Gloria Steinem has endorsed What I think, as an individual: We need to re-elect him.
Are you serious?
I'll ruin it by posting this, but I have 567 tweets right now.
I cant see Payton no where else
clearly not everyone should have tattoos they only make you more awsome!
how about a nice cigar?
Thanks amigo!
Don't know the song, but that is most ridiculous name of all time. I was flabbergasted when I found out it wasn't a stage name.
Who wants to play WHERE IS WALDO? Tell us where Waldo is and try to up that #vacation #travel experience - no ads pls!
Only one shot at a dream, live with no regrets and take chances. Who know's if tomorrow will be a last day..
ugh are you fucken serious -__-
Go Follow ASAP #teamblackhouse--->
You will have a happier life if you learn to forgive people instead of thinking of how to hurt them and get even with them!
Today I Stepped On A Cornflake. So i guess that makes me A Cereal Killer #ThugLife !
RT : Straight from DTW Airport to the Six Street Lofts venue to setup for tonight's Gala Let's make it happen!!
At RB Rotary w Rotarians sing a welcome song to their guests!
- Larry Brown coming on tomorrow????? Is Toby in Houston coming on tomorrow too??
Lunch Amy’s Bean & Cheese Nacho Snacks, Poland Springs Water
Just a little less than an hour and a half before the final Pretty From a Distance show. You coming?
you speak the truth
"Kids join gangs because they got no one at home and they don't love themselves enough." - 16 yr. old girl in yesterday's workshop
Oh... And Zulegar was ballin' may steal the show at the Spring Game
I know u gon kill it !
at my brothers baseball game. haha
I want Starbucks
If ppl who answer the phones @ Zappos R the most important employees, then R our ushers the most important employees? ~
No doubt! RT Opening night for Cirque de Soleil's "Totem" in San Diego. AMAZING!!!!!
After years of aguing about the Middle East I had my first argument in the Middle East today.
Wow! Twitter has photo sharing. Is that coolness, or what?
Singing at private party outside by the pool;)
Jimmy Conway >>>
Can someone explain what is the definition of the "snowflake generation"?
Since 2011 over 27K fewer families are receiving assistance to help them afford child care so they can work.
So, dudes up in the mirror showing how big their asses is. I wanna do. c;
has internet again!
Getting excited for Mexico but trying in your bikini at home alone is the saddest feeling
Have you ever wanted to play the piano?
#Browns just showed why they are the worst team in the #NFL. Reiff and Hill = better value at 22.
There has been a minor change in the schedule for #WellnessWednesdays & I will be teaching the #CFYoga this week !
Feeling good, having shown my boss some of the UI elements I'm introducing into their admin areas. The "U" stands for "User," people!
I get to see my sweet boy in a week.
they did! Very well too. I thought about texting you
Plz follow she a good friend and i will give a shoutout and follow you back!!! RTl
Time to go cram for finals
I come to class to see your pretty face every day.
kinda I guess
awesome will do thanks
I'm a cat apparently.
Still at work (SMH). Long day. Headed home soon then off to soccer practice. I feel a run to the border coming on (Taco Bell).
ok we'll make to check it out at
lol omg you'e just blowing it !! jk jk
#InCollege Thursday equals to Friday. yeah huh!
Great ending to
Count down to Salsa Under the Stars {{{TONIGHT}}} at the Albuquerque Museum Amphitheater, Old Town. See you @ 7pm!!!
im lost... process of elimination: I know it's not
I quit smoking. Im tired if people stealing my lighter.
re "reducible to numbers", I agree. But point seems pretty clear to me from observing last several years.
You should also try to swing by !
Blame it on the rain
#lgovsm not the content unless it is agreed - the fact of it happening seems ok
RT frustrates me when male colleagues react to women-only code sessions with, "Why am I excluded?" Instead of "Why don't you feel included?"
A problem should not take the full 50 minutes of class to teach.
its just not the same&sitting there mking millions makes you seem out of touch too.
haha, okay. Found a recipe for toasted marshmallow ice cream, but it requires cooking the yolks which scares me.
Tamara at A: there is a limit, the more you segment an audience, the larger room for error there is."
Nothing in that article about Facebook should be a surprise. It's common practice for most sites. Facebook just gets the attention.
okay... and oh yea my bad I forgot I'm not texting you lol
Kyle Kuric proposed to his longtime girlfriend at the UofL Dental school graduation. She said yes.
Happy birthday! MT Happy Birthday to...us! The MoMA opened its doors on this day in 1929. We had 681 visitors the first day
oh my, where's my fainting couch...
Tomorrow's Budgeting Workshop has been canceled due to lack of sign-up. We apologize for any inconvenience.
I did, and I do! I need to relax, remember her words of wisdom, and forget the commas.
Thanks for the RT. Hope you are well!
The Urban Meyer stuff at signing day.
Now this is interesting RT : This article certainly is interesting given the Local Paid Inclusion brouhaha - bit.ly/wQcgKr (read #7)
All I want for christmas is you!!!
DID YOU KNOW?! "A housefly hums in the key of F." YOU'RE WELCOME!
a friend of mine getting married in Long Beach. is already happily married!
I've been at the library for an hour and a half, but if feels like it's been 5.
“: Can't sleep. Watching AGT with the West Coast. Let's go.” Crash time for me, Fred, but I recorded it.
I wanna go to the one @ south padre...is it scary :S
so validating! Thanks.
do yourself one better and skip the actual graduation...
But were all the same cuz on St. Patricks Day were Irish an so on an so on
Thank you for the RTs!
Greatly enjoyed my 100 minutes at #edcampIS; thanks to organizers , , etc. Racing back now for school auction.
I'm NEVER lending out hair ties again. I never get them back.
JP Morgan's lobbying expenses: 1.9 Million Dollars. Trading Loses: 2 Billion Dollars. Being a JOB CREATOR needing no regulation: Priceless.
me too but why does Tamara have to be so cynical
Mom you're obsessed with the Australians.
that's a good one... right now I'm shooting with a 15-30 Sigma which is OK optically. I love the super wide
Nearly 20 years ago, an archaeologist told me that "stones do not move". The ancient animations prove that statement wrong.
Capping off a great day with Debra Moffitt, Robbin Gourley, and Walter Dean Myers!
apparently. I stopped after the first episode.
“: People are game changes - 77 million people turn 65 this year. #tchra” <-- institutional knowledge right out the door.
Woo! Dr. Who! FYI, for Christmas I asked for and received a Tardis.
lol they're rad dudes i hope you win!!
Spring students: What advice do you have for summer students getting ready to go?
um, what?
“: is it one of your personal shirts???” could be!
thanks a ton! Working well
LOVE Guru I AM :D
our new single "Know How To Dance" is soon to be dropping this month (;
every time i see someone talking about OKC i automatically think they're talking about Okcupid.
- Guess our guest supervisors R more popular :) P.S. You can also reach them for free. Good luck.
sorry folks, is closed. Minifig outside shoulda told you.
You know the great Colombian spot. I applaud you!
Back in my old Kentucky home.
Please follow me !! :)
hate drinking something...and it's so cold that you can't feel your fingers anymore. >_>
I saw a tweet with a headline, but I didn't read it. She's a teen mom who travels around speaking about abstinence. SMH
I was blasting WMYB in the car and singing loud &my 3year old sister tried to roll up the window... I'm just that cool
Watching #MIOBI United States!-
what branch was your father in? My dad was in the Army, Pacific theater
this day needs to end
SUGARFAMILY WILL STAND UP FOR
your shoes are always so edgy! ahh love it! you make everyone feel so special....kisses =)
We got somethin for okc ass!!
Overwhelmed with love from my friends.
#SanDiego why are you so nice? Maybe it's because where
I know, but the #Clarisonic is seriously wonderful. The Mia is the smaller one and it is only $149, but #Olay is $28, hm....
Yes, the phone Kony lesson goes to geopolitics, the great white savior and global philanthropy. A great teachable moment.
You guys are awesome!
good one
It was just my imagination
We like the idea of luxury lounginess occurring in our charming little space.
still not feeling well?
CRASH: 99th @ Stark, only one westbound lane is getting by
your trip is making me nostalgic! and reminded me there's a popular dessert in CA called a nanaimo bar, a brownie-like variation
Women might be able to fake orgasms. But men can fake a whole relationship.
Where have all the followers gone – long time lasting – they have gone from Mitt to Newt –long time lasting …
are you trying to view or register? We want to help...send us the link of what you're seeing?
wave to me in the photopit
So tell me this did Wade really get all in the coaches face like that and he bumped him???
Remodeling of upstairs almost complete. :)
MIAMI IS ONLY 1 HOUR AWAY!!! WERE BREATHING THE SAME AIR!!!
Not stated in 's presentation: Morgana becomes evil, gets scary-sharp cheekbones; sacrifices Morgause + 5% bodyfat.
Yeah :/ happened last night too. So I just put on a movie for tonight. Hopefully it'll be back on tomorrow.
I can't DM back you bc you don't follow me :( hahaha
Thanks. The templates worked GREAT for the session! Save me LOTS of time getting ready!
I just don't understand. There should be an IQ test to be parents.
I promise to never tweet this much about #TheBachelorette again. It's just that it's the season premier!
Oh you will. I"m sure of it. I don't even know what it would be like. I don't have words.
just bein a guy
I love sunglasses cuz u can stare at a lady and masturbate and she'll think you're masturbating to something slightly above her head.
You are obviously the one who cares--I just brought up another side of the 'legacy'
It's all makeup ;)
Pretty Girl Swag.
Tumbledown tonight at The Mint. Grammy's tomorrow.
Thanks, Kris! Watching!
Yesir buddy! Since 7 g...ready today son!
way to copy that comercial.
followed :) I love ur Background and icon ♥
Totally stunned at the moment. SMH!
dang whybaby why
This old bum at work just told me to get out his face before he gut me like a fish LOL ok
imma look it up fa sho... u tryna roll ?
“Dreams don't always have to exist when the sun is down and your eyes are shut.”
Trinity has $2 Pucker Bombs tonight! 125 E Juneau
will there be time at the March meeting for me to talk about geotagging sensor data using #Processing, #Android and #Arduino?
yo bro! all you need is a van! shes in middle school! no ice cream just pizza!
Working happy hour for tonight. 2 for 1s. And, I'll buy you a shot if you beat me at darts, which is likely since I'm very rusty
same # as the Packers this year
I absolutely adore and completely love you Danorush02!!!
Finally going out to eat peruvian. Once I get back #Insanity and then sleep.
I know 
#organdonation status button shows power of social networks to change lives: Dr. Randolph Schaffer of
Marvin is the Best Voice in Gospel to me
Bass and Drums are the key ingrediant to any awesome band u those two instrument locked on the bottom your in good shape.
Best day of our lives
To all my followers that followed for me deserves a cookie . <3 ilove you guys (:
Isn't K-high good here a bunch? I never get dealt hands that big, but feel like its very thin value and would check.
I can't sleep!
Wants to congratulate his radio partner in earning a doctorate in cold rockin it!
CONGRATS to ur family!!
vs zone that may not be a bad thing
Cutting it up boss!
$49 for a month membership and a 25 minute massage at The Sporting Club or La Jolla Sports Club ($250 value!)
Sister, this story hurt me. : I posted it on my fb ..... Smh sometimes I lose so much hope in our judicial system."
I realize that I am beginning to make a lot of people uncomfortable when I bring "race" and "oppression" into "our" perfect world of yoga
Great way to wake up. Phone rings - "Are you available for the next two days?"
like??? A website has gone live??
I am practically salivating over my planned mid-morning nap
YOU ARE AWESOME !
Thanks Karen! Seems like the photo business is treating you well! Great job!!!
That awkward moment when you realize 4 days of trying to figure out a data snafu was caused by a crazy dumb mistake you made at the start.
Good to know you like & appreciate the work we've done exposing Christianity as a deliberate fraud. We have a lot in common.
oops my bad #mahomie ! better? haha
More than half of 2012 grads out of work or underemployed and the #GOP to blame
Celebrating #Easter morning blasting !! No one will ever steal the joy I have in Christ! God Bless Everyone! #HeIsRisen!!
that shit cray. I HATE those girls.
hahaha, whatever works!
They hate what they can't understand, I'm past their comprehension...
def dude lol damn that sucks thou well wish u where here would smoke u out h8t smokein out bymyself
exhibit. Diverse crowd interested in exhibit-quality & characters. Thanks to Moss, Dirk & photographer Jesse.Come 1st Friday July 3,6-10.
Coming up at 4:15pm CT: interviews about Allen West's divisive remarks.
completely opens up the bracket for us! Good luck tomorrow, i'm gonna be a force to be reckoned with when cals at the line
Beautiful eyes and an amazing smile
#idRatherHave The And1 Shorts Than The Nike Shorts
Bleh dont you just love family
Stands It To Think Now
Cleaning cars :)
Probably soon. Would you like me to retrieve you from the coffee shop when we decide to leave? It'll save you a rainy walk.
Today's strategy to slow all the two legged swimmers in the water with me down - blind them ; )
#incaseyoudidntknow I love your smile.. :*
Hunger games!!!
Sox are awesome..
best. Mothers Day tweet. Ever!
No One ever said it would be easy!
Def cool, in a bunch of ways too: the innovative way of recruiting by , the shout out of my man , nice
Will try to get paper back to you today-- proctoring wrtg SOL this morning so will have time to finish :)
Chilln until the fight tonight..
Consulting Zagat for a place for dinner. Suggestions?
Direct Message me your cell. Camera on deck for your birthday!!!!!!!
If they lose I'm holding you responsible! :P
yeah that was the problem i forsaw ... that he and grimes are both big gamblers and 2 of those is dangerous to have
Come to the CAB meeting tonight @ 7:30pm in the Senate Room. This is your opportunity to decide what you want to do or see on campus!
good for them
Last chance to support launch of exciting new ethical fashion boutique Vaute Couture. is matching donations!
ok x
Just made lunch. Now it's time to do some rewrites. I have over 800 songs so this is gonna take awhile...
Follow the adamouski international art competition if you are an emerging artist and would like to gain more direct opportunity
Carve out some time today to exercise and I guarantee you....it's time well spent and you will never regret it!
The three golden rules of designing for friends and family, by Mike Kapetanovic (): netm.ag/qTpYDb What's YOUR experience?
It felt really good waking up this morning.
Can't wait to try it out - thanks!!
Still one of my favorite Hendrix songs - "Rainy Day, Dream Away"... Thats LA today! Check it out!
Almost my birthday :)
Loved Oprah's Next Chapter with Bishop TD Jakes :-)
The reason I don't like mullets is because I like to party in the back AND in the front.
Aw! And here's to many more! Happy mother's day to you!
thank you and congrats to you as well!
Best time at our retreat! Love my KΔ girls <3
: Thats ok! thx for the follow :-)
There is a single solution to all the problems in this world today, it's entrepreneurship. :)
So much beauty can blossom from brokenness. Read Isaiah 41:10 Hugs to you Kalona!
#nowplaying botch. We are the romans.
"All who hate me love death." -Wisdom
far? i am doing great ,uncle don land.he called some hours ago.
Potential "uh oh it might be 88" Boston Marathon cheering gear to include freezepops and super soakers.
I didn't believe voting for a guy I might want to "have a beer with" was a solid reason to chose this countries leader.
Make a difference today in someone's life!
GCB has been canceled. God will get you for this, ABC!!!
Enhanced security inside courtroom. 4 Travis Cty Sheriff Deputies just at the door to courtroom. 2 guarding the gate to prosecutors/defense.
btw- wish you were here to get drinks with us tonight Haley! come on what's better than #vampirediaries and drinks?
“ RT : I wasnt born with enough middle fingers to let you know how I feel.”
Before beginning a Hunt, it is wise to ask someone what you are looking for before you begin looking for it. - Winnie the Pooh
Just got an amazing submission to the contest. There are penguins involved. You guys are taking this up a notch! Love it! - The B Side
yay! I'm a customer for life now! (:
Re-eeding?? What is this reeding you speak of?
- No problems, call or email me tomorrow at your convenience. Thx.
thanks for great valentines night out!
I have site visits and board member event planning tomorrow. Sprained ankle at the worst time. not sure how to make this look classy?
In Europe, coffee was once paired with anarchistic political activities.
he is and I know it was random, but I thought you would of liked to knoow :)
#StayAwayFromMeIf you are gonna want me to change for you.
Its not cool to string somebody along and lead them to believe that you care about them.
DeVante Designz Inc has created all new walmart and target Christmas ad's for TV commercials , keep a eye out for them :-)
At least you didn't compare it to MySpace. (Also, I am sort of secretly fond of GC.)
Half of dickinson saw me cry yesturday.-_-
ill be at dan electros guitar bar tomorrow night pm For Open Mic blues jam Join me
Don't forget u can pick up that smirk clothing 2222 summit ave col ohio we movin the movement
Finding that the busier my #socialmedia career gets, the less time I have to monitor my OWN social profiles. Anyone else have that problem?
I'm sorry, but this American freedom stuff is hilarious! Stand up for America, bitches!
Thanks! I'll look these places up. I'm still on eastcoast time so will be very early...4-ish? :)
Favorite Monkees song: "She". Setting my original Monkees lunchbox on the altar today.
EVERYBODY WISH A HAPPY FUCKING BIRTHDAY SO HE GETS LAID TONIGHT FINALLY
T work is rude..must have beer!
haha send this diva a text when your working in Nash !
Keep it up!
fukyoukaren means idgaf because I'm trying to look cool but I really do give a fuck lol
Justin Bieber looks ridiculous walking out next to Mayweather and 50Cent on
fuck i might accidentally clicked spam, i drag the link to a new tab. let me know if i DM you with a link a random spam link..
When one is looking for the internet broadcasting service provider, they should look into the firm for all the features that it is providing
every time someone gets eliminated on a reality show they say "this wont be the last time you see me" but then you never hear of them again.
Hey guys! It keeps getting better! stay tuned for upcoming shows!
Yay it's Thursday! Good morning world! Thursday = My Friday
My favorite visualization technique is imagining a white (or I like to do violet) light around u that is healing and will protect u.
RT : Reform Jews everywhere celebrate a historic day in U.S. history. Thank you, President Obama, for endorsing marriage equality!
Bootcamp #3 in progress...more info later this week...
Im helping PATSY STONE at #Marni right now. Kinda dying.
It was $26.66 with tax. That is the price if you buy it at the box office. It will be slightly more if you order online.
Pretty sure my school is screwing my grades so I have to go to summer school.
ok... twelve hrs painting is enough for today. time for scotch and hockey.
Playoff guarantees are never a good thing! Go out and do it!
Mama's Gun was the best Erykah Badu CD
is playing billboard!?! If they could tweet and help get `s views/comments up to play it too that`d be amazing.
why do beliebers, smilers, swifties and selenators always think i'm into their music because of one direction? you can't even compare them
I gotta change my pic I've gotten so much hair since then
If you are cold at night, let the promise of my love cover you like a warm blanket. Matthew White
Congratulations and WELCOME to our newest member to the Precious Gem Team, SONDRA CASTELLO who signed up on line.
Sometimes that one person,isn't worth it anymore </3
please tell mike mayock all scoring plays are reviewed. He said on Wallace play: "they have to throw the flag on that one"
#ABDC is on(:
I haven't ran into a real man In this city yet only drug dealers n lord knows they dont flock ova here
thanks so much babe! Right back atchya xoxo
#Tigers just beat the White Sux 10-8. Damn near lost this game in the end.
National Lampoons Christmas Vacation
so my buddy is telling me Jack.in.the box across the st are selling parking tkts fr 500
Is the blonde chick for big bang theory smart?
Sitting between two awkward first dates at the bar at Abigail's. On the plus side, got my drink without needing to order it ;)
My comedy plans this weekend are doing 10 open mics then go home and try not to pull the trigger
Booked a worldwide commercial for Amazon Kindle today !!!! :D
"i feel bad but... girl sucks" hahhaha
hahah ok. I'll be here bored to death
f'ing golden
Looking forward to following and tweeting with the DC Seminar folks!
THE BEST PLAY I HAVE EVER SEEN!
everyone follow
my dad passed away. I want u to know cause I know u will understand. Love u kidding.
I love Softball!
Is it just me or is Verne way off his calls tonite ?
Who up fwm
"Clear alcohols are for rich women on diets." - Ron Swanson
Working on a cover of 'The Lazy Song' by Bruno Mars! It's gonna make you not wanna do anything...
Not a hashtag but any text within the tweet. I'm also hoping for some actual text understanding - run matches running and ran.
Well I guess good bye to twitter for a couple hours.
Words they will get a treat!
God I thank you for waking me up this morning, because someone didn't make it
are you kidding me?!?!?! Please explain to me why Travis Orlando went home? #noheart that kid is awesome
Today's tip: When lifting weights, don´t grip the weights too hard. Too hard of a grip can raise your blood pressure.
This classical music bullshit
NYC DOE to close Williamsburg Charter High School. History of trouble. In 2010 charter posted ads offering $100 rewards for new students.
Triple H > ....It's not even close
Hey Anna! Saw that you followed us. Thanks for the follow. We gave you a follow back.
Going clothes shopping again today. You only live once, right?
need to get my driver's license renewed today...sounds less than fun...
Great! Gotta a few more weeks before she's ok for public places.
I'll be able to die happily the day Kanye and Taylor Swift do a song together (btw: I've never heard a Taylor Swift song).
That was fun! Have do done Z or R twice?
1426 Fashion Week takes pride in how far we've come. But, we HAVE FAITH in how far we CAN go. See Nov 11-13 in Ft Lauderdale.
Malya saying we know how difficult life is in the rural areas, so we work to give people support.
Another day in hell ugh save me <3
Time for Hoosiers to vote tomorrow!
Follow Please ?
Curse you, reply all!
Ah I know! I ask him to every day!
God will only take you into a conflict he's equipped you to win.
I utilize the twisosphere 4 advertising our services and it works. Just cause it's free doesn't make it bad.
it's downtown near church street. And no it's still open lol
well I guess if you want change, you gotta start somehow. I just wanna get home from the overwhelming B.O. myself.
Any of my #nanowrimo peeps up for some #nanowordsprint s?
“Adopt the pace of nature: her secret is patience.” ~Ralph Waldo Emerson
Making Toast by Roger Rosenblatt is my #fridayreads - memoir of helping to raise his daughter's kids after her death. Beautiful, sad, wise.
nahh blood... jokes. its coo tho
What i wanna know is who keeps tigers, monkeys & other exotic animals as pets? They belong in the WILD people!!!!
Good luck to today sitting with over 100k in chips!
Hot City Pizza - just discovered it. Has a unique, sizable beer selection.
Hmm to me she does and plus youre saying a 28 year old isnt buying? yet 20+ y/o are loving her?
oh, I love classic rock! And I love that you share that adoration! Reverb snares, big hair, big guitar solos!
yeah! :D
any contests coming up to win American Idols Live tour tickets? I would love to go!!
if this were a song - it would continue "I'm ready to play..." ;)
Good God!! Be a kind neighbor and NEVER cook fish!!
hm, I wonder how much we can get for a 9" custom one...
okay time for sleep :) Gotta be up early in the AM. Good Night everyone.
alright let's go
Oh word? In there. RT : S/o ! Opening Night for New SportsGrill () 2night! College Park MD!
#ihateitwhen you take a 3 hour nap wake up and your still tired, but it's too late to go back to sleep.
no shit?! Dam I'll go read that.
Off to bedd.
you can socialize on our porch anytime! ASO to the person who "didn't want him on their porch"
Just woke up from my nap 😳
I always have this fear that one day you are going to discover that Im not as great as you once thought I was.
Humans create their own ecological niche w/language & culture. Need to recreate if it's going to be sustainable.
#california bound! i'm so looking forward 2 some alone time with my honey!
Lake Oswego School District Superintendent Bill Korach to extend contract by additional year
my coach didn't play me and I was ticked so I went in the game for the final 3 minutes. Fouled out, 3 were offensive fouls. Lol
I miss you
My friend Zach Fleury says if you're a hipster in Seattle you tweet, instagram, and wear skinny jeans...interesting formula
I'm pretty sure that TD pass also tied P. Manning for most TD passes in a season in a dome with 32
The Sky is blue 💙 The Money is green 💚 The Weed is purple 💜
here i go again...
Thank You To All My New Followers via-(twitter)> Fans via-(reverb) > Friends via-(myspace)> And Likes via-(facebook)...
Casting calls for Makeup artist and wardrobe artists today!!!!
Writers: get published at ezinearticles.com ...
might be kind of long distance runaround.... ;-)
thank-you for the retweet. much appreciated ; )
Next game is tomorrow night 6:00 at Montbello vs Pine Creek
I've never seen a picture of you! You should post one :)
What is 39??
When you’re lost in this crazy world you got somewhere to go and get found. Thank God for hometowns #nowplaying <3 this CD!
country boys>>>>
No no I'm really not that excited to see oh who am I kidding I'm so freaking EXCITED AH😜😊❤
raging headache + work = megan in a raging mood
Check the "Events" tab to find the diLasso concert info and RSVP....we're still figuring out Facebook's new Page format.....
Certainly, one can have morals without law or religion. Or can they? (Part 2/2)
Beats make music great.
Remember that time my husband fell asleep on metro, wound up 40 miles away, lost his phone, and had to take a cab back?
I have a shiny, new PO BOX- one step closer to my LLC! Wonder who will be the first to write to me at PO Box 12132 Albany, NY 12212-2132. :)
in chicago-ese that is 'blogger-fy'
Was searching for the #supercomputing company #Cray and found no account. Instead I found mobs of people tweeting cray as #slang. What now?
Food Fact of the Day:April 28,1796 'American Cookery' by Amelia Simmons is published in Hartford. The first cookbook written by an American.
wont take a pic of my 18th century tv
hi! yes, i would love some museum-types to follow :)
are you going to HHI?
Also we are 3 away from 200 followers, let's get all those today and when we get to 1,000 followers we may start doing some prizes!!
Drupal 7 successfully moved from Ubuntu Lucid to Amazon's Red Hat rebuild. I think I installed every PHP module known.
I hate Joe Buck
Making coffee and looking at the stock market.
Sarah legitly said ''can i have a taste of the rainbow'' without realizing it
If you ever want to get hold of me via phone or whatever you can follow me and I'll send you in DM anything you need
Smokin! Just the thing to go with some ice cold 'Rita's.
I bet that one is gonna be filled with
Thanks man . And work with you as in like what ?
Let's hope the Tigers can build some momentum with this comeback victory of the palesoxs
It seems as though every time u scorn someone they seem to get their act together.
So #oomf tells me I was slap the shit out of her ex bf but I really don't remember that at all...I guess I really was drunk that night smh
sounds great!
it was awesome to connect in San Diego! Hope your trip home went well & that you enjoyed
Tired archivist here. Love my day to day work (was born to do it, I think), but geez I need to do some searching.
I just forgot about it. I doubt anyone will do it.
Dreaming of a "4-hand" massage ...
Looks like I'm gonna own my first jets tshirt
It's MY time! I'm gonna "Go Get It"! Thank you for your constant inspiration, God bless you & the entire Atkins family!
unplug and replug the power connection to modem and airport. starts with modem first
Drilling his own river ice pays off for Alaska man - BusinessWeek
Fuck All haters
Happy to show support for Nashville/TN tonight by texting GAC to 501501 fundraiser was great!
I know!
“: a little bit of sandy in the sun” hahahah
What video is everyone talking about? ** The one with Vinny**
Good Morning to All my parents
I live by montwood middle:p RT by where do u live?o:”
Grocery store line: the woman in front of me just drank half a bottle of antioxidant juice & then told the cashier "I don't want this."
nice cant wait to see
why the unfollow, man? I don't make the cut for 167K followers? Ouch - follow me back
It never got cold enough this winter for me to wear my new snow pants...I'm breakin' 'em out today, in late April! Yeah
Hear, O Lord, and be gracious to me! O Lord, be my helper! -Psalm 30:10
that's awesome :) any bird pics?
At Yoshis in #SanFrancisco watching in concert! All I can say is #R&B is alive and well, You Better sang Man!!
Did you know you can refil/reuse an old cartridge? Just stuff it with common fabric batting that costs about $2.00 /yard! www.genxvapor.com
My life is one big embarrassing moment
since you didn't get through are you at least on schedule?
you sent a DM?
Back in the day when football was football
!! That is so cool!! Thank you so much for tweeting!
Just under 2 months away from STEP IT UP!!!
Kat- I saw a cute pair with wedge not sure how high at PAYLESS SHOES :-)
Just talked with Tom Christina of about the Anti-Injunction Act that was discussed at the #SCOTUS Monday; #podcast to come
The Original Funny Facebook Status Updates
and one time it said I sent it to a ton of people so I tell them all sry I didnt send that
: at the door then :)
As an #entrepreneur, when you make your first hires, hire your weaknesses and don't micro manage.
sugar free kool-aid is like orgasm free sex....
Damn everbody barely passing ms.bunting final..
Working on orders and planning for the WINE & PAWs event (April 21 & 22, 2012) that will benefit the Safe Haven program at WI Humane Society
Happy Mother's Day to all the moms, grandmas, great great grandmas, great great great grandmas. Much love ♥
Twinkle twinkle little slut, name one guy you haven't fucked.
#nw best show on earth
Bacon, Eggs N Hashbrowns Yum breakfast for DIN!!! with delicous Orange & Apple split w/ my Boo!
Looking forward to the deals...
Ask us any question and we'll respond with a movie quote.
What do u need help wit hun???
What time?
oh wow. People need to calm down. They can't hangout with anyone without rumor starting.
:) saw that state st has ramps, and I'm sure they will have morels in the next week or so.
Revere the Ride.
We must take charge of our own destinies, design a life of substance and truly begin to live our dreams. ~ Les Brown
Hope you had a Happy Friday!
the Warner Bros. and their sister, Dot.
Well whenever you have time :)
#65 | Because we enjoy crossing cultures... Art, Music Technology and more...
Please come to the midwest (Milwaukee, Chicago, or Minneapolis)! We need you!!!
"Ohmygosh did you see his butt?!" "No I'm not perverted, Shalyn.." "He was wearing baseball pants!!" <3 #ICheckedHimOut haha
With Dixie the dog at the vet ER. Her allergies are so bad she can't open her poor itchy eyes. They just took her to give her a shot
lmao tell me about it
I was overwhelmed with the turnout today and want to thank everyone for their support and energy.
It's about $35. Sometimes my friends in other countries buy a bunch of hoods w/ their friends & split shipping so it's less!
First ejection as a Brewer manager!
writing a verse
we are very sorry for any inconvenience
“: #ireallywant someone who isn't afraid to get a little physical ;) #Scorpio”
Who even reads bios...
Bill Fletcher giving us laborious history lessons.
there's a show on abc based in colorado actually at the bass pro shop in northfeild and its pretty funny
.: Thr YouTube channel is managing will show better analytics of how people engage/watch stories. Share info.
Uncle Rush Please help my friends get on the amazing race!!! Please repost!!
Rested and ready to get it down like James Brown for tonights Screaming O show at Thee Dollhouse
Hello this is a bit off topic, but who do you think France will need more at Euro 2012 - Yohan Cabaye or Hatem Ben Arfa?
damn shame
Robert Bobb has our children's best interest at heart, we all need to support him!!!!
to see how the mind works is intriguing , especially in the hiring process . So doodle on! :) I'm at the Mavs game! :)))
He just needs some Japanese home-cooking, and Cupid's putting on his apron.
Seriously looking for social media/writing opportunities. Please hit me up if interested. I'm the greatest writer in the world.
Follow Back .
HAPPY ANNIVERSARY DANIEL HOFF AGENCY Thank you Danny for letting me be part of your history as Head Theatrical Agent Here is to your success
Dude! Don't pimp me out to your brother if Your gonna get butthurt! WTF
The way I change my self is a reflection of my social media accounts. It helps me to growth and listen good advices.
On a side note, when an author begins a text with Derrida, it makes me swoon.
I was more amused than irritated -- after all he's promoting himself as a PASTOR.
You know I saw that first!
After all that, Ishikawa pops out on first pitch. Ballgame.
it was great to see you too Matt!!! #blessings Can't wait to hear your music!
ugh we should've done that on our rainy days! Season 2 is the best for a 12 hour couch marathon
Star gazing' on summer nights🌟. >
I'm back on the scene, my favorite color is GREEN!!
I Need To Meet Some New Girls .
Car in the parking lot with California plates that nobody knows whose it is. When in doubt assume it belongs to the boy. Boom, always right.
Me too! MT : I'm told will be pulling up in a Lear jet. That's my preferred way to make an entrance.
thanks for the tip about This chat is much easier to follow now!
well I dont like her!
Feels amazing to be releasing new music again... I will always love my fans.
And now my emotions are up and running, literally running down my face.
#TeamCharon “: If i had a chainsaw, i woulda cut that crown in half.. is my SUPERSTAR! #realwhereitcounts”
sounds like a great day to me!
WMYB was on one station then One Thing iss on another xD
There are some brand new apartment offering great deals.
My fuckin nerves bad right now...forgetful muthafuckas...
In the kitchen going ham again
I attend Full Sail! And, I haven't had time to load some of my samples. I'll try to do so soon. The quality is perfect though
would Ryan Reynolds do a good Bruce Wayne? haha
At least work is slow today #amen :)
Candlelight Yoga tonight?
Wish I was there to go shopping with you!!!!!
Thank you honey bunches : ) love you too! RT S/o to .Happy Birthday Sissy love you (:
TAKEOUT's Tweeting. How 'bout a follow?
you are my light! A north star!
If I never watched football before and people said "you really need to check this out". I would say they were crazy after watching tonight
thanks dude!! “: love the piece on #umbro on today. Good find/awesome video!”
It amazes me how many people walk out of the restroom without washing their hands! C'mon MAN! Not kosher at all!
Reg gas 4.79 in downtown chi and then have the nerve to say only the full service pump has it for $5.10 BP have u done lost yo mind???
nowhere working
Eurydice previews tonight! Sold out for tomorrow's opening!
I'm a big fan of your work. Very talented, keep doing what you do...
Thanks for the follow
Empty inbox ACHIEVED. Finally.
Full house for Cripple of Inishmaan!
WebCamWindow T-Shirt Contest! Take a guess at what we're doing next. HINT: It's big, new and AWESOME. Tweet us your answers! RT Please!
I miss my boo too! :(
RG3, that's one of the robots in Star Wars right?
is never gonna notice or follow me )': ... Hopefully #Someday!
as Mom, and now Laura, can tell you, I don't put salt on ANYTHING!! Never have.
juss listened to Rated R.. Brings back memories :')
You can now :)
Family looks out for each other.
lol thats not too far! only a 6 hour flight! haha come take a vacation out here and get some ink! :D
can i be west virginia? <333
You're never too old to learn something stupid.
RT : happy birthday shoutout to the good bruh , make it a great one~ Thanks Good Brother!
having the same outfit as someone on the train -.- <<<<.
no, link me to your YouTube page. I'll subscribed right away.
I can ride my bike with no handle bars.
What's good Concord?!
are you already at BAH??
Not on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday but on Thursday. . . Thursday.
I remember a CNN reporter left to run a company that stages elaborate wedding proposals. You could do that with gifts!
Thanks for helping build the excitement!
hi there-I have a media opportunity in Dallas working in digital : ) Going to miss the #ATX though. how have you been?
...cheer; raises morale; inspires associates, arouses loyalty; and laughs at adversity, it is beyond price. " - Colman Cox
Go follow my new music page . Working really hard on new material for you guys to hear.
Congrats! You can pick up your free family admission pass at the event. www.kuik.com for details. CU there!
My love for you was bulletproof but you're the one who shot me
Yeah, Piano Bar is solid, too. It's technically a Hollywood bar, but without the negative stereotypes of most of them.
I think I have to listen to Shaggy's "Wasn't Me" right about now-ish.
Nice to meet you at Immersion Weekend
Tonight!! We are young!! ;D
Yea were you watching it too?
yup, still in love with
Let me guess: Murryland?
So don't sugar coat and mislead about how the Courts EVERYWHERE allow lawyers to bully & abuse Autistic adults & injure us
Follow me on twitter
Corny motherfucker , your such a ass kissing lonely sucker .
A1 tomorrow: Boy hides in box.
here's a question: when can I be a guest on #tmzlive ......
Whoa, science! You can run 10k better/faster on a Sunday, if you get SOME exercise (and don't smoke) during the week. Huh.
The less said about the Shocker, the better
The Somali Muslim community is speaking up against the Type 21 beer and wine license.
lol. The struggle.
That text I just got :) made my whole day >>>>>>
OK, let the games begin! Happy Wednesday! Ha ha ha! I said it first! LOL!
Working to create an intervention to help a homeless client get the care he needs. Best Wishes to Everyone!
Looking forward to chatting with the folks at today. What a treat!
Yikes! I felt my throat close while reading that description. I'm allergic to cheese and bacon and I don't like donuts.
K-rec leagues are currently going. Kronum League season begins August-September.
Harold Allnut is a pretty good mechanic.
#DailyCircuit Chaka Kahn's I'm every woman, Grace Jones "Slave to the Rhythm" and Pink's "Get the party started".
but I don't want you to be playin Jocelin just over the summer & then all back on Mireya when school starts again bro -_-
so glad I don't have to work tonight. I'd be a #zombielibrarian. Instead I'll be a
Just because you can doesn't mean you should. Each method should only do one thing.
new hit single #putitdown check it out :)
Can someone let me know if they can see this tweet? Cuz idk if my twitter is working!;(
Did you watch the Marcus Dupree story? I hear production on Cam Newton 30 for 30 has begun...
It matters not what age you are only the quality of life you have in those years. I know you are well-luvved! 
23ppl from sahs are at same gym as i. Sadly none of them get along with me hehe wonder why
you are apparently sitting next to my friend at the rose garden right now. Say hi!
RT : “: Managers: Focusing on your employees' weaknesses provokes them to disengage. Focus on their strengths."
The worst drivers are old Asian ladies. Seriously who gav u a license
Let It Ride - Automatic Loveletter
Congrats! Also, I'm sorry I missed your birthday--hope it was a good one.
Points here and it is game...set....match
That's nice of them
I came home and literally it looked like someone came in my house and put new groceries throughout the kitchen && its all my favess? Weird..
work it girl
I love
suggesting that everyone writes everything in plain text and version control with #git did not go over that well in that meeting
Richard Fish: "Is that the two cents? I'd be looking for change."
Please please please #Packers move up and get Trent Richardson
just said she'd leave me
has semi sleeves? Who does his work?
Couples have been annoying me lately...
Barak Obama now supports gay marriage. Good, I'm happy. You should have done this a long time ago, and encouraged NC not to act like idiots.
just off of water. i think it's jefferson and ogden?
Looking for a few kind-hearted Seattle denizens to volunteer for a charity auction Saturday, October 9th. Please email me for more info.
Who needs time zones when you are on #laketime Great evening riding!
you at school bro ?
Sucka!!! 😜 I have 10 hw passes so I don't have to take it😁
pumped for your show in Milwaukee this Sunday!!! The night before my 30th bday! :) Dun dun dun...
Cleveland took Weeden....
In a way though, "Consistently breathtaking" could just mean "doing the bare minimum to stay alive."
Why Kyle aint called me yet 
I LOVE YOU THIS BIG !
sadly, back to the drawing board. re-assess budget in the new year; dropped for the moment. until then! :)
Trying to get things in order for tomorrow's charity event: stop by the Allerton Hotel & donate $20 to the homeless. I sing at 7pm Floor 2.
GOOD LUCK!! "Getting ready for third round. I tee off at 4:54" .
Ralph, thank you for stopping by and Happy Easter everybody.
Stop acting as if life is a rehearsal. Live this day as if it were your last. The past is over and gone. The future is not guaranteed
How come nobody gets knockdown is this mediocre opening fights?....ROOKIES!
in late 2001/early 2002-obviously a time of upheaval here in the states-was considering joining an org trying to build bridges....
Welcome to the darkside! Isn't it fantastic?
which makes my job that much more difficult statefarm as a comp isn't known 4 it's commercials but that's how every1 buys now
Without a doubt. Looking forward to both of those discussions.
I really hope nothing #bad happens from #eating too much
Was up hours ago - just getting started
Just ran into Steve from ! Thanks for spreading the word for us!
Floyd for a first! 1:44 remaining
Hot Hot oo we got it hot hot o we got it Hot chocolate :) M do good :)
Wow...Jake Delhomme just got let the hell down.
<- - this is what the World's Greatest Aunt looks like! :D
Thanks for all your prayers. My Pop-pop made the transition a little while ago peacefully and in no pain.
Why do couples flirt over Facebook/Twitter? Just call your girl up and tell her.
for me it is b/c I'm on my way to do something productive & I can't be reached on phone/FB/Twitter, really free 2 read & think
did I just hear the Vanderbilt could be a final 4 Team? .....
I have my right sleeve tatted but I'd be very happy when I can get it finished ! Unfinished tattoos bother mee.
yeah I told her that you onee and she said "who's Kaylee?" ... This is a problem Haha
Thunderstorms are in the forecast. I better watch out for lightning since my odds of getting struck are better than winning Mega Millions.
Is anyone surprised by that?? RT : ..anyone else notice j-mac is immeasurably cozier w/ ted robinson than with his own brother?
eatin sum african food wearin sum african clothes nd dancing to sum african music nd speakin african with ur bro haha
RT : O yes you will, you taken one for the team
valiant effort there, bud. I'm pretty sure the Torts interview one has a pretty short shelf life, anyway. Fun novelty, though.
I really wanna know what she did and how this all plays out
#cpchat I just received my admin license and was looking for some advice from experienced administrators on how to get my foot in the door?
Heart. RT : You can't A/B Test creativity - to make a good game, it has to be good. -
Easter egg hunt with the little monsters from the church next door. The adorable meter is off the charts.
just got back in the saddle after a hella great summer! how are you jett?
When people are having success.....they don't need to be motivated, they already ARE! :)
what's good with the homie?
Geicho has the worst fucking commercials.
me too!!
Hi Do fellowship programs like genre specific specs like sci-fi or one that would appeal more to the masses?
Goodnight, fools.
The rain is slowing down already.
Did your wisdom teeth come out yet?
RT Tis the Season for Chimney Fires Galore. B4 you get all 'Perry Como' for the holidays, consider an inspection! <--Heaters too!
Ha! I just opted out of that today. Thanks for the info!
You know your San Diego synagogues!! Seriously, what a beautiful building. I'm biased, but it is.
apparently, we want an event management system
Thinking about going to Knotts Berry Farm today hm
Russ/ticular fortitude.....
Going to sleep before 7:30am for the first time in a month >>>>>>>>>>
So glad you enjoyed Dago Joe. O, I like how that sounds. Today we're over by & at 2nd and Lafayette.
that's not good!! Hang in there. Make the docs take that damn thing out
Love how my phone calls people by itself..
HI Jenn. Hope your week has been blessed and you are smiling! Remember God is at your side always! :) HUGS
I tried playing it cool but you've got that
Sushi is awesome!
On that late night creep, heard tht you a freak #Np Yello - Late night creep
Hosting a New Year's celebration? Check out our lighting fixtures that will keep your room bright throught the night!
I'm thinking of taking up tiddlywinks instead of hockey. Does anyone know any friendly Rhode Island leagues?
I'm afraid to follow on Twitter, for fear of an imploding phone. Or worse.
Thank you!
like how to actually make a living ;-)
Thanks Rusko and Bloody Beetroots, for making a 25 minute drive only take about 10
I know I'm a latin nerd, because I just wrote on a paper "Too many gerunds"
Why dont we have better candidates for President?
“: Half of Americans think #SCOTUS justices will rely on their partisan political views in health-care ruling. A good guess
I want to yell, " She's lying to you! He's cheating on you! SHUT THE FUCK UP!?!" but I really don't want to deal with them.
Sweet! When's the race?
lolol I cant retweet your tweets or I would. you got favorited though
Build up in a cooling system reduces airflow and is a cause of compressor failure and indoor air pollution.
G'morning! Good to be here@ #SMBLA!
Spot trending now in Chicago, IL: The Kerryman - Pub (live updates)
How I do it
I haven't been for years, but I love the Hall and that area. BTW, have you read The Monsters of Templeton? Set in faux Cooperstown.
THANK YOU! So much fun!
CLUB SAGA tonight 18 party 21 to drink arrive early gonna be crazy ill be spinning the hottest joints all night 8779 wurzbach!
U gangbangin on breakfast nigga...smh tht piece n quiet was short lived lbs
patrick...rochelle here. I know who drew p.is. Which catch u refer to?? U saying it was interference?? What???
Give Mom her flowers while she can still smell them...Sis. Hope Moore
Thank you Katie!!
Re-writing my final. First version was way too hard.
freeresortbeach.info New Post - has anybody been.... Read it now at <html> <head><title>410 Gone</title></head> <body bgcolor="white"> <c
I've got the new song from and George Strait's new one "Drinkin Man" just for yinz!
Just got to the door for a Honey Baked ham after waiting in line for 45 min.
damn, had been working on Jerry Narron related names all day today
what happen, them niggas ran you out of Taylor so u trynna hide here?
it's going to be interesting next season to see all of the new faces on these NFL morning shows.
plywood, roofing paper, shingles. Or so I assume. I don't really know.
Today's Insider Branding Secret: Repition creates expert status!
In Honduras last week. Mini-oasis created by cruise industry - again, I ask myself what the best balance is between culture and cash?
bittersweet graduation though, dont have ANY of my family members here except for my parents and my lil bro..
condol. on Browns loss, please chk out our kickstarter if u can, we would like to "draw" you 4 our fundraiser in Parmatown Mall
Try tonight's Free Play special: The Mighty Mouse Grilled Cheese! 4 kinds of cheese on grilled sourdough served w/ warm tomato soup & chips!
What happened about one hour ago gave me courage .. lmao
THIS UPSETS ME. I'm going to go to sleep now, I'm passing out. Goodnight and sweet dreams. c:
That does make it difficult. But who doesn't like Legos?
Hello, Thursday Beer. You are special and rare in my life.
Start your engines!
Obama's in town!
yes but in order to be a contender hes gonna need to be get some offense. gotta work on a j
to what song? Jeezy?
whats the point in going to school if you're not even going to be there..
DRY HATIN IS NEVA A GOOD LOOK!
>:o) Will we see you at the today??
Come check out the Coyotes Alumni take on the coaches of DYHA at Oceanside ice. Sat 10/22 at 2pm. Proceeds go to youth hockey
PLEASE DO... or a lock of hair... I'd be grateful for either one.
I had soo much fun tonight at practice! Soo HONORED that I was able to play with you & have u as a coach! :D See u 2morrow!
Let's B clear: the Republican plan to "broaden the tax base" by raising taxes on poor is the "class warfare". And all their cand. support it
Some things you just don't forget, like mom's cooking, dad's belt, or your old prison number, but forgetting to buy mac&cheese is just wrong
Timeout on the floor. The game is tied 38-38 with 15:54 remaining
I want to find you at #sxsw and thank you, we love using you - where will you be Saturday?
Boston, Kansas, Las Vegas, Africa, Canada,...stay tuned for the roll call! :)
chile is an open area for us can we skype to discuss how we can help to bring tech into the classroom.
You are the best-est ninja-est. Lemme know when you get dumpling cravings (The govt is totally gonna try to decode this msg).
We're doin the walk for Lupus this sunday here in Denver, It'll be my first walk but we're walking for my sister who has Lupus.
The Met is doing Janacek this week and so are we. Bring a friend or two to Sanders Theatre tomorrow night at 7:30pm
That's really kind of you :) Tell me how sexy they are live? ;) haha
is back from a great trip to Los Angeles
IF I WERE PRESIDENT I WOULD MAKE EVERY ONE DO WHAT I SAY! - PAT FORD*
Arriving at Holton Arms School for a performance for their Creative Summer campers! Hip hop, belly dance, Afro-Carribean and modern!
Last night's example: waiting at Howell & OK nb (no sb bus either) @ 7:35 PM. No bus until 8.
lol thts fine. Ill figure it out. Ill just bring mine if I have to
Aaron, who do you like best on your left - Dwyte or Pawel (day1b seat 10)
Business Tip of the Week: Hold volunteer positions. This is a great way to stay visible and give back to groups that have helped you.
Off to Comcast Death Star on North Avenue to humbly plead for replacement cable box
Have a great Saturday everybody! It's a great day to be a
Oh man! Wish I got to try it. Make it for me next year
You know soda addiction is bad for some when you look over at the car next to you and see a lady drinking a 2 litter from the bottle.
No guarantees at any point in life.
Just got a bundle of Superchunk reissues thanks to and !
I think Peoli is trying to ride the coat tails of the genius that is Bellichick
": If you line up all the cars in the world end to end, someone would be stupid enough to try and pass them."
Got ma' whole crew tweetin' now!!
you're alive!
If someone is trying to rescue you from cyber bullying they are telling you that you can't handle this on your own.
LAid down for a nap after church and now I'm Just waking up....I missed the whole concert....gotta love being sick 😒
that looks delicious. Enjoy babe & say happy mothers day to my suegra for me
Looks grindingly dull. // RT : Room 301 of the morning Roundtable session at #CITRT. Terrific discussion on how IT roles differ.
sophisticated goons
I HATE NIGGAS THAT'S STUCK ON PITTSBURGH TRAVEL SOMEWHERE I'VE BEEN AROUND THE WORLD
Brrrr It's freezing out there.
Gunna go hard in zumbbaaa w jackie, jackie , ashley , ashleys momm & chelsea (;
sounds like you need a lot of air freshener and hand sanitizer.
I believe in you Day 2 of using a loaner laptop. Cross your fingers that today goes well, lol.
Sounds divine! What are the ratios and do you think that grenadine would work in this?
yeah im gonna need you to get that together lol
What a bitch. :c
Oh hell yeah drinking a #pumking oak aged I'm in heaven
Seriously? That's an easy choice.
Today is the free day at Have you seen 's The World Stage: Israel yet?
what is this TKC Anonymous thing?? Send it to me? I want to see!
Does enthusiasm in social media mean lots of exclamation points??!!!
Writing, to me, is simply thinking through my fingers. — Isaac Asimov
It wasn't perfect but I want my old life back.
Thanks for the shout out !
Let’s start with introductions. I’m MaryAnn Long your moderator. I’m an independent Mktg Operations Specialist in Milw/Chi
Hi Andrew. Just an FYI...Overall leader gets 50k. Turbo leader gets the Camaro for only $200/buy in 6 times.
Thanks for the follow Be Rad
Killin these kiwis
1 month into professor-ing! amused by the 'did i miss anything important in class?' question
awesome... i shall see you there
well sir, you put oooooooonnnnnn for your city lmfao
Might go for a run though.
After losing key players on offense this offseason how will Philip Rivers and the #Chargers offense fare in 2012?
also, saw the hunger games, good for all it had to accomplished in 2 hr 20 min. however,lacked emotional depth. Jennifer Lawrence was great.
SteelSeries QcK. and made me do it.
No words.
Assist Craig Smith
alright we will! Session tonightt?? Ima buy some bud aswell.
May is gonna be a good month
Collaboration across diff. depts (w/ diff. language) is hard! Calls attention to importance of scholar w/ multiple skills (theory, practice)
Tom Felton!!!Duh who else would it be haha
Causey "Journalism is solution"
burquedesign thanks for following The Hilltop on Twitter!
i feel distant and have a headache from jealous people.. i need new friends!
what is this? on Twitter? and I thought he said NFW!
Get the March Madness iPhone App. It's awesome and clear as a bell!
Just 24 hours ago , I was in your arms <3
thank you!!!
Aww thanks so much...ok good glad I was making sense :)
Lost in a zoo I saw many animals.. Mouse BIRD Monkey haila ! U 2
Bye bye Wayne county
happening? Or wishful thinking??
Nothing to lose
Quiero CAT y lo quiero YA!
That's a lot of PBJ's!! “: The Mega Millions jackpot for Friday's drawing is now estimated at $540 million. #MegaMillions”
You never know how useful Acrobat is until some 'friend' accidentally deletes it.
for hym to ever
Email me and I'll send you some free shit!
I love you more! (and really want pancakes, dammit.)
I just signed a petition condemning this outrageous act.
Huge thanks to all the wonderful people at #Mintex12 today! Many more!
Playin sit & go's on Poker Stars
I feel flu-like :(
A lyrical rhyme for your future use: mashuppy, hushpuppy. You're welcome.
Landrieu just said sth abt black men who "really may look scary."He says "u can tell me to shut the hell up." I wish!
RT 2Tix for Ted Leo & The Pharmacists at Bell House (Brklyn). Friday Dec 30th at 8pm. Reply by 4pm, 1 Tweet Chosen at Random.
Brooke White isn't a too bad at acting...
Breakfast tacos!
UK are you shitting me? :P americaine = horrible / francaise = ca existe? :O
Ice on the streets, fire on the DC Metro... Commuter's apocalypse.
Awesome! I'm looking forward to it! See you there in a few!
why do you think most managers are worse?
Thank buddy =) I will send you details when I have them
I've been super happy with webfaction. You can easily run several small sites on one account.
exactly! I don't share with people who don't share with me.
I'm cool with the argument that you can be healthy and fat, but I'm not so down with undermining healthy eating practices for every1
And he puzzled and puzzled ’till his puzzler was sore. Then the Grinch thought of something he hadn’t before.
Since the +#WomenBuild~^~ inception in 1998, #volunteers have constructed more than 1,800 houses, including 6 in #Miami-Dade County.
thank you for the Mention!!! May God richly bless your day!
I'm surprisenly not the jealous type . Cuz if I can't trust my bf , how can I expect him to trust me
"we have laze accuracy"
we just picked up a new pre-amp and a new compressor for the studio. oh baby so tasty!
Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night...LAMILL is OPEN today and our coffee clinic @ 10am will go on as planned! See you then!
thank you, but I know I rarely be out around folks to and we are good he's getting big and smart
Transformers 4 was the Business! Not buy a house and I might introduse you to the stars j/k
Ready to leave School bro '.'
wow, impressive!
Not the best day but #BoyzHitABDCagain will deff make it all better
you never tweet me anymore
Love that!
#icantlivewithout music, its my escape from the everyday crappy world than annoys me.
Read poems by Langston Hughes. Enjoyed a lovely dinner party hosted by the College Prez. Prepped for a wknd getaway w/ Paul.
#DjpaulX. Will be in the mix tonight at foothill lounge...
haha. I think its fair to say that those legs have been dia-beating us!
Im in love with Nessa she calls me and tells me dont go make no line's for the 4's cause i got em for you baby <3 shes on point
How do you bookmark tracks in the new pandora? #help!
Putting a lot of work into the site this week. Cant wait for it to go live!
Wangs Wings voted "Best Wings" by the 20% OFF Wangs Wings! Only w/ a
And, of course, thanks to our partners in crime, the very shiny It was an amazing weekend.
he who is on
CAUSE YO JUNKY ASS ALWAYS GOT CHANGE PUSSY!...
Hey, man, it's not like DePaul isn't without its diversity. Oh, wait... Hope you're up to something good!
she was?? Ohh ok. Ok Jeffrey is freaken adorable. He's my new favorite man. Can't wait for all of us to hang out. Tienes tu hotel?
Just played #Madden13 with RGIII OMG! Kudos
who wants to go to AC with me next week? borgata 1600 reentry, wsopc 1600 reentry, and one of the most beautiful cities in the world?
i love this fuckin beat
Great tweetup! Thanks for arranging everything. Great bar.
IF NOT NOW WHEN
Just took my first Contemporary Dance Class with Kaelyn Gray! Ouch! But it felt so good inside!
What he, what he don't knowww
Tune into WIIFM (What's In It For Me). Make sure you let the audience knows exactly what is in it for them.
Millie and Alex
HERO or VILLAIN? YOU DECIDE: 1/31/1606 Guy Fawkes dies in jump to escape the hangman's noose for his roll in the Parliment Gunpowder Plot.
when a girl tells you about her problems, it doesn't mean she's complaining, it means she trusts you.
It was fun to see you. Great place for a "hello".
Did you know that wine was once a truth serum…or maybe it still is…
TOO BAD CAMPPSSS
Scream if you were born THIS WAY!
Did anyone else cry a little tear of joy when Cthulu began destroying Burning Man? Best year ever!
Makes no difference whether a Beamer Benz or Bentley is the car you in
RT : RESTATING Q3: Is there such a thing as phone interview etiquette?
Judge trying to reach Riseling to come back or testify by phone.
Thanks for resizing my photos to create better pictures! ♥ your work & the cust. svc. is the tops, I am one happy client. :)
Wow #TweetBot is awesome.
Heard of 'dance like no one can see', but never 'dance like you are writing end user docs'. My lack of dance skills, explained.
Fish baking in the oven. to juice or not to juice, that is the question. Maybe i'll juice something that doesnt require any major effort
Stop. Spackle time.
wat makes u say that?RT Most parents are the genesis and cause of lesbianism.
If your morals make you dreary, depend on it , they are wrong.
i saw it mentioned on quora a while ago, but it looks like it's iphone only? (please correct me if i'm wrong!)
SA reclaimed the top listener spot with Rhythm & Jazz Radio Sunday but Seattle, Milwaukee, Dallas/Ft Worth and Houston are closing in!
Rajon Rondo hits jumper at 3:47, now has triple double. Rondo has 11 points, 11 rebounds, 15 assists. Still 6 turnovers, though.
A touchdown. I just wet my pants.
Omg #serena and dan
will be on June 9th!!!!!
this is their way of saying anything the trucks can do we can do better
Easter dinner: ham, salmon, #pdx farmer's mkt carrots, Gramma Judy's potatoes, antipasto & veggies, spinach salad, strawberry cupcakes, wine
get it buddy!!
TRUTH RT DirecTV CEO Mike White said he looks at NFL Sunday Ticket as loss leader in order to retain customers.
ohh i will!
what you doing
The Holy Bible states "Judge not lest ye be Judged"
I need to know what to do when that time comes lol
no ms paint is for graphic art fobs
Yes, keep going. I don't want to see the Yankees in the WS again. Jinx away!
I seriously JUST had a conversation about that, it's unacceptable!
Listening to someone explain how to play sudoku to someone else whilst also explaining how to use a touchscreen is so interesting.
I really wanna be a dancer. A professional ballet dancer, to bad I'm too late for that dream
Looks like I'm watching a movie by my self cause is gay!
I agree! You look great!
P.s. i am a bit under dressed today ... woops ha
#loweredexpectations RT Yeah so I def enjoyed the avengers more than this fight.
VIJ'S AT HOME: RELAX, HONEY by Vikram Vij & Meeru Dhalwala - celebrated Indian restaurant/chefs in Vancouver. Great early LJ review!
FOLLOW BACK...IM ZACK SCOTT'S NEPHEW..
It is!!! Hop 'n Shop, Wine 'n Dine...what's not to love.
What language is this guy (Griff) speaking?
It's my dads b day today. I am so thankful for him... Adopted us when I was 5! He is truely our Guardian ANGEL! Proud to be a
IM GOING!
“: BIG SHOUT OUT TO kelso varsity!!! Especially and the boy !!! Great job boys” who r u
That's awfully convenient of them. :) Thank you again!
What a great day for Madison's first farmer's market this year. Get the spicy cheesybread fresh from the oven. Delicious!
Study Abroad Myth: I should study abroad my junior year. FACT: The "best" time to go is different for everyone. Visit CIE for more info!
Almost forgot that today is The Dance!
Honored to be speaking at my alma mater, the University of Maryland, today about sports journalism
Can believe its May 1st.
yea did u see the 2 ladys with the odd hats haha!
can u post the link to ch1 of ur fanfic please :) i really wanna read it but i wanna start from the begining :)
lol, Chris Brown a do you like he did rhianna boy !
Ugh. Vegas.
Things that need to stop....bullying
that seems like a good use for Times.
I'm buZzed off my ass right now and everything still seems like boring
I'm sure that officer enjoyed sitting in on the meeting for 3 hours.
Such a gorgeous day out, glad I get to spend all 24 hours of it at work...
I'm a secret truth....
RT : Got my ballot today. Can't wait for the debate!
So long you're gone.. THIS IS THE BREAKUP SONG!! #TheBreakupSongbyAmericanHiFi<3
#21CRadio A2 He said they gave everyone wristbands that lit up in rhythm to the music
but I was an 86er, so the 80s wouldn't bother me I guess! Lol
Refreshing Ped. Pal Foot scrubby "Polar bear smooches" has Tea tree, Rosemary, Peppermnt, Menthol crystals wakes up those tired grumpy feet
We agree!
Nice to see active in the twitter world!
I've decided to end this pain by ending this war with myself. Ive lost everything I ever wanted and im stranded alone it's time to end me.
=) rt “: awww that's sweet but I've finished my run in the show! But they should still see it!”
it's a matter of time if the right grp gets in charge, all of that will change!
We're about to blow your feed up, brace yourselves... <3
No more fish fry dinners or (also fried) potato pancakes. No more!
My number one reply from my cousin when I call him crying is 'its going to be okay booboo, ill beat their ass, dont worry I love you' lol.
Once, I tried to post racial and go to a mall salon. Had to chop 5 inches to repair.
...although watching the video while driving would be more hilarious. we'll see how that works. not too many moms on the road.
"Steve Martin is sending Oscar updates."-Mary "Steve Martin from Jamaica?" -Mandy Whitenack
Tonight, I drove by my old gym in Memphis -- the place where I worked so hard to reshape my body and self-image prior to my wedding. (more)
Gary Hayes Social Media counts, items on various forms of social media, as you watch - and projects into future wp.me/ps3nS-rY
you can have mine then! Haha ;)
RT via : CONGRATS SAC! Looks like we r getting a new sports & Entertainment complex, finally!
THAT was the result of #poorchoices >> RT : I saw you on campus the other day... You weren't wearing pants!! 😜
Had to use the restrooms in 30th Street Station at 11pm. I now have several brand new phobias.
Home gonna eat something than off to train some more!
RT? FAVRE ON THE GROUND FAVRE ON THE GROUND LOOKING LIKE A FOOL WHEN FAVRES ON THE GROUND HAHA
Digging out on the east side? Send us some Farwell pics.
Had my world rocked by on Saturday night. Hoping I wasn't the pretty girl in the front row he was referring to...
Great job on the shoot today everyone!
The on Watts is once again on my list. They forgot my nacho cheese for like the 10th time.
~Marcus Aurelius~ Nurture your mind with great thoughts, foryou will never go any higher than you think
nows your chance :-)
I'll never be able to call Ron Artest "Metta World Peace"...that nigga will ALWAYS be Ron Artest...lol
Sounds intelligent to me. :)
and parent trap omg
#LeapYear freakout! Already hearing about watches who think it's March 1st
Goodnight everyone(:
Do you know you just followed Sade's biggest fans since the 1980s?! We just saw her in Denver a few months ago. Welcome!
were good bruh, no worries
If you love something set it free if it comes back it was meant to be
dawn & ericson sit down over tea in sf, missing your voice already. glasses raised, to the cat and his author
Party at Identity Cancelled for tonight please please spread the word...
LOD: organized into nodes & links: every piece of info has a subject, a predicate, & object. ex. [JonVoss][follows][NYPL] on twitter
Thank you for NOT showing the #Gophers during the reception at #mnclassics last night.
Attention Staff and Students due to a change in weather conditions Bramson ORT will be closed on Monday December 27, 2010.
So many creeps
Give us a call & find out why we are the most recommended remodeling company in Texas! 512-453-5858
makes me want to be a taxonomist. well, not really. makes me want to hire a good taxonomist.
Angela!!! When will you invite us back???
It is better to offer no excuse than a bad one #GeorgeWashington #quote - Let #TermPaperDom fulfill your academic needs to avoid bad excuses
On the precibus of a great change.. not sure what it is but I can see God working and I am excited to see what this change will mean..
#FezFriday this is Rex the Impossible the Moose in Glendale. It's his if he wins. Yeah?
Well that changed my mind.
One of those days where everything annoys the shit out of me ...
Sorry to hear that your house was broken into, but you should check out our app! Its to help you after a break in!
“Shoot for the moon. Even if you miss, you'll land among the stars.” Brian Littrell
hey lady! all is well. loving SF. how are you? what's the latest?
In that gulf tourism commercial, I don't think that guy is from Alabama. Will post Hollandude top ten albums of 2011 later today.
Have you seen the message I sent you?
My clone army is vast and strategically deployed.
It's ironic that The Glee Project airs on Oxygen because when I watch it, it feels like i'm inhaling Cyclon B
So excited for Daniel Tosh tonight
you hit the nail on the head.
Van Halen is coming to Columbus, Ohio on August 2nd. Oh Yeah.
#AutoCorrect just substituted "Ballet" for "Baller". That's totally un-baller.
MY ACCOUNT IS HACKED!!
Another choke job for Lebron, can't pass that to Haslem!
your welcome ;)
I love pretzels.
Dear guy crossreferencing stuff on his iPhone with stuff on his iPad: you're in too deep, man. Too deep.
LIBRARY PEOPLE GO OUTSIDE WHERE IT'S NICE. GAH. (take me with you)
Seriously I put you food carts through college and no one wants to roll by GK today? 150 people here wanting food later.
alone alone alone.. word ta kat williams lol
I seriously need my PS3 controller, I'm so mad that I left it at a friend's house.
the beat plays.. your hips sway and I understand.. fluent in the universal language of dance
I'm about to watch hangover part 2
Yeah men......we are a family,Big family:)
Lol= This conversation isnt going anywhere and I dont want to talk to you anymore.
it's an amazing feeling!
Autumn evenings will fade away, but our memories are here to stay.
No panic yet for Kansas. Just steady and staying the course with poise. They're weathering the storms. Now need to turn the heat up!
In case you are not moving nearer to what you want in sales, you probably aren't doing enough asking.
We just picked up new batch of "I ❤ Chicago Sex Workers" shirts = literally #HOToffthepress!! still warm! Pink, Red, Grey, Black & Brown
more like everyday
Ha, no apologies necessary. I found it to have no charm, confusing story, personality-free star, chemistry-free romance...
“: khart all day. thank you ” yes haha...Get money!!!
is there a reason my evo 4g keeps restarting itself? i've had it since april or may of last year. had problems with hero before. WTF!
I feel like dying
LOL, UR famous ! UR definitely strange but hey, different strokes for different folks! Not hurting anyone so it's all good
.% of our guests are homeless veterans.
I need it. Where do I buy?!
96 D'Yquem is pure peach & honey.
Watch, listen, and learn. You can not know it all yourself.. any individual who thinks they do is destined for mediocrity.
BREAKING NEWS: Prominent Orlando Attorney Dan Newlin has been arrested for DUI.
was it a"handy" man?lmfao
Help us to help others! Join "The $1 Million Facebook Experiment" on Facebook. Memebers donate $1 per month to charity.
I hope the hawks win this series and all the celtics just fucking retire lol
A good general not only sees the way to victory; he also knows when victory is impossible
Waking up from sucha good dream>>
I need a new Buddy.
just finished watching a bloomberg story about the google founders...feeling inspired.
Great! Stay tuned, shirts will be coming out soon.
This guy is the cutest! Is he yours?
Extremely excited to have a big piece of the puzzle just fall into place.
How does go about preventing teen pregnancy?
O Mysterious one, we also struggle to see your face. In the midst of darkness, evil and suffering.
Commute from the new apt to the office = 18 minutes walking.
Thanks--have a great Thanksgiving
is appreciating the rain. No more event planning! Being here, now.
Among the worst perspectives on human evolution I've not been able to sit through.
yes I did, I was on vacation. How about you did you, have a nice Labor Day weekend? My mother really like Betty Boop.
#imagine Boy :" Uuh hey sexy whats ur name? You: Ahm i´m (ur name). Liam:" Uhm hey and this is my hand that will punch u if u dont go.
Only if they can surf!
Yay. Friday the 13th. Today should be nice.
#Grannyquotes Whenever i'm changing, my grandma walks in the room screaming "TSHIRT TIME" and starts fistpumpin
I agree!!
np. Just let me know specs, info and timeline
Only have school till 1 :) get paid today whoop
Lmfaoooo ": im about to shoot these chinese people talking about some "come owside" and they not here"
Dear distance ; eff you.
how was R5?!
": What others think about you is not important. What you think about yourself means everything."
...the goal has been reached but they can use extra dollars! This event supports BLVD & features ! Seattle, take note.
Good morning! I think winter is here to stay. All outdoor plants frozen, ice in the water bowls, and baby it's cold outside! Staying in!!
Landed in Chicago. Time to drive to MKE.
No, girls dont just wanna have fun. We take it fast, take it slow, we can come undone.
but Joe Rudi did end up playing for the Sox...so I went with just fingers
#sm Tip: Wrap brand message w/ interesting content to form a long term relationship
Ken Raske: Why are hospital re admissions so high? Discharges to nowhere. Without supportive housing we can not combat re admission rate.
HAIL SOUTHERN!!!
What's embarrassing about that?? I also love the jalapeno jam burger and we're glad you did too! Enjoy your day.
Pompey was betrayed by his own people and run through. He could have used a little reliable Asian steel.
I think you're a great writer and editor. Explaining a thought accurately, briefly, and with a sense of humor is underrated
#Coachella2012 lineup is awesome! Now I can only hope the free-ticket-fairy will be visiting me.
Creatively you can work in ways that you never thought possibly. All the highlights and all the shadows right in front of you to play with.
“: I said that first grant!” fuck yourself tulo
hi i am nominated as a free vpn user by TUVPN.how can i get and avail this offer
Hope you're safely in Florida's arms,
I read and liked it and A SHORT HISTORY at almost the same time, before realizing they were by the same person.
Such a great day today. Gonna be hard to go home.
is a loser who takes 3,000 photos and then tweets about it :) on my account... :) #eyeroll ANNOYING.... ;)
Back from the orthopedic... the walking cast stays for another 2 weeks.
#ff Amazing #SocialMedia ! Join us in person or online
Ha!!!! My son hating on
Oh how my long week starts today 😔. Cant wait till its over !
Good Luck Today ...
what's your favorite part doing in Lopez Tonight? and. When you gonna have Victoria Justice? rcks means rock
who cares u melt brains :) WOW THERE'S ACTUALLY A SKRILLEX HATE PAGE ON FB WITH A BUNCH OF PICTURES OF ME WHEN I WAS 16! CREEEPPY!
what I realized from watching this guy play guitar: everyone has something awesome they can do, 2nd nature whether its fingers on a guitar,
Just got in Diner Journal out of Brooklyn! Come and get some great food writing and creative recipes including Grilled Turkey w/ Porchetta
Hope everyone had a great 4/20.:)
"How do you have sex with a CAR?" "Mainly just alot of rubbing up against it..." #MyStrangeAddiction AHAHAHAHAAAAA!
Thanks! Merry Christmas!
I think I should create a Skype for moments like these. Honestly, I'm just a lonely guy most of the time that misses my friends.
Good Morning! You cant beat B-Fast Tacos on a Friday or (hint) at your Holiday Party! Send us an e-mail to make it happen. :)
Frosting our peanut butter triple layer cakes with dark chocolate ganache. Creamy heaven.
Im loving all the work that's coming my way yesterday had 2 photo shoots, a music video, & mtv casting call! Busy busy and loving every min!
'hand raised'
My mana be tryna make everybody think she's the victim, when in reality, she's the suspect !!!!!
I finally got on with my phone.
Thankfully, he didn't have a weapon. The bus stayed at the stop (which everyone loved) while we argued. Then he was ejected.
Soo glad to hear that Colin! I will be calling you Friday to ask a few q's.
San Antonio: Clouds/sun & breezy. South Texas will be cloudy, Wet, and Breezy Wed thru Sat. Today: Clouds/Sun, breezy. High 72.
She sent me a nude pic, my reply. That shit is Wack tho.
There is free WiFi at the Convention Center except for the exhibit hall and at the official conference hotels.
I love
hahah love it
Headed to the Cape for the day with Christine and Malfi
Even my existential crises are having existential crises today. Everything just seems open to question. And this is a good thing.
I am writing a children's book this summer...how cool would it be to write a collaborative book with kids as the creators?!
it don't sound like you kidding that much. Lol
he wont
HAPPY HATCH DAY BITCH! Yeah that's right, you were hatched from an egg.
Would love to hear more about your critiques of SCOT
Small screens force us to put user needs first.
Where'd April go? Time is going by way too fast for my liking
According to a “Time Magazine Survey”, 59% of Americans would rather sit in a Dentist’s chair than sit next to someone on a cell phone.
awe thanks. That's me ;D
#FridayListens Audio re-read of THE OTHER LANDS, Book 2 of David Anthony Durham's brilliant ACACIA trilogy. Read if you like
Happy Mothers Day :]
happy birthday <3 i hope it is a good one.. for whats left of it atleast :)
That may have something to do with you being a lesbian.
gnu has this protein I'm about to start taking called gnc lean protein it got really good reviews as far as the help it gives b
I don't care about his beliefs I've just never liked him won't start cause people tell me I should
Finally! A #J345 presentation that didn't default into the Super Bowl. Well done, MADinteractive. Nicely played,
H.I.T interval...#done4!
Another day another ARCH project. #green #green energy
Chillin at The Nick in Birmingham. Good crowd already and no ones even set up yet! -MWM
Me either. I think the Cards are going to succeed in the post season again too this year.
great job in the movie you where my favorite lol it really show a different range for your talents so great job love it
Did you know that less than 5% of lost cats make it home? Even indoor cats are at risk. Ask your vet about getting your pet microchipped.
Will do thanks for sharing. Sorry for the late reply!
That I should seek therapy ASAP.
Skunk hunting below the top of Strawberry Hill, south side.
What a great suggestion.. You are so right! Sons needed to hear the speech. You sound like a great Dad and Roll Model:)
about to go play some tennis before working tonight on production schedule for REVOLVING DOOR...
the #rangers coach is an asshole
He hit on my date. I remember that much.
i am to please :)
Can I go even though I'm neither young or professional? RT 13 days til Education Conversation with 4 TIX LEFT
That would be awesome! It would be great to see sympotic studies offering more holistic data on 'elite practices.'
and i can sit here and say ill take your girl and beat the shit out of you afterwards cuz i know i can, but what will that prove? nothing
I hate I phone chargers
Listening to The Score by The Fugees. Damn! Such a classic. About wreck Bikram. 8pm class, day number 16 of 100. Where is Lauryn Hill?
it was great to meet you today! Love your heart for serving & making a difference in the lives of kids!
Free fry friday sucks lol
F U Doan!
Vegan lemon pistachio cupcakes in the hizzy!!!!
If radio stations are having boyband contests, they should be required to play boyband songs 24hrs a day.
Jus ate some Wendy's :}
Hey in Robinson -- thanks for a great haircut! Katie is the best!
Actually it's quite a high E natural. :)
Really? Safety?
Goggles Up!
hip hip hooray! Thanks!
yeah safe house looks good to - this star wars ish is ridiculous line around the block
what game are you guys going to be covering?
See you bitches at training on Monday!
i knew you'd take advantage of the word "anywhere" lmao
Congratulations to the White Cloud High School Class of 2011!! Today is your day- enjoy it!! :)
either feel it or try to kill it
I wish the july 20th game was here in Jacksonville..my wife and i would be in attendance cheering you on..
I've been missing #southbeach and everyone and everything at home! And I'm teaching this weekend in Miami.
My computer beat me at checkers, but I sure beat it at kickboxing. Emo Philips
Checked it out. Closest would be the Roanoke festival in May.
In honor of the Miracle Mile Art Walk, we're opening the museum doors for FREE to all, 12 to 6 pm tomorrow!
I thought it said "ripped whores cares"
RT : Korver was wide open and you KNEW he was going to hit that. #CHIvsDET----->EXACTLY!
im gonna have a heart attack! saint fucking iker!
"Good God in heaven almighty....we've got a cataclysmic situation developing..." I would do anything to be there when it hits!
Received my DVD's of #WatershipDown and #PlagueDogs from Amazon today. Cannot wait to compare the two.
People Wonder Why I don't want to Live in the Republican South because of the Injustice of Criminal Systems of Blacks in this Country!
Looking like Heat and Mavs... What ya think?
Concert with at Alfaro's!!!
Cold day in the burgh.
I thought it was an innertube
oh ur one of those kind of girls
When my mom brings up having a guy as conversation as were driving in the car. #thatswhenyouknow #deanaproblems?
but that would put out the fire. Let's keep that flame eternal.
Everybody FAKE #LessonLearned .!
is opening an office in Detroit! Sweet! The city will really benefit from your presence.
Next Ingnite Chicago is July 28th (Thursday) at 7pm, thoughts?
THANK YOU! Why only 1 (not intuitive at all) way to do something so basic? Abt ready to throw this whole Mac in the trash can.
haha well it's all work this month and the next for me. But, the bagels and eggs soften the blow. And some OJ. m
Kobe is going to be so sick if they lose. But I'm not shocked that Denver is not backing down at all cause they are a gritty team
O u doing it now
In honor of World MS Day, please sign up to ride in the Best Dam Bike Ride. The Ride is great fun! MS is anything but! www.wisms.org
We've changed our twitter handle to make it easier for our clients to find us! Follow for #immigration updates!
I love Kaiser!
yall need some beats over there?
we should be growing now
#boycottrush advertisers & Don't be the last to hold on.
This weather is just,sexy
Send me a link to your mixes / podcasts. If they're dope I will repost them !
Eat em w/ chz RT : I have about 90 unanswered emails and I really don't know what I'm going to do with them all. What do you?
Oh man, now i wanna know the rest. It's all about the details ... ;)
'Even tho you may be afraid abt many things, don't be afraid to allow God to do His work in you, looking into the deepest part...
Goof Troop annd Dark Wing Duck was my shyt
is that it? I thought it was like 14 haa
Let us know when the post is up! I'll be eager to read it.
Someone in the office just yelled "No!!!" when they announced Manny Parra was warming up.
One day ill be tha main women worried bout tha otha women lol but until than i hv no worries...
lol - I happen to like Pinterest a lot & wonder why more men aren't on it!
If I get up to 100 followers on this account then I will follow 20 of you guys on my other account!
Why are brunettes so proud of their hair? It matches their mustache. btw i love Brunettes ;)
You crack me up. Drake is the reason for #yolo. RT : Did Drake really just say #yolo in the motto?
Mm m good! Cant wait til Sat 9/17/ I love dumplings & so does most everyone at Single Stop USA
The New Year is approaching fast...
Nol I'm up for today, what yall got up for today?
I'm so bored..
Thanks for the follow!
ALABAMA SHAKES
how rude
np! I need more followers! Help me get to 1k! xoxoxo
Well that kaiser roll was simply delicious.
Nice room! I see you made it safely!
“If you can't change your fate, change your attitude.”
Inquiring minds wanna know just how many licks does it take to get to the center of a tootsie pop?
when their voters are dumber than they are.
Damn I didn't know he was that old, but then again all Asians look young. I'm often mistaken for a teenager
Anti-nutrition is pollution in the air water and food we eat.
I'm so excited! Been a year since I've been to a playoff game!
Sleep, I've missed you. I think after a night of trips and falls, I deserve some quality time with you.
thank you
You're inspiring JLin. We need more Asian-American role models like you out there. Keep it up!
Jason Pierre Paul single handedly won the game tonight first score of the game crunch time tackle and game saving block
Talking to realtors about our poor buying choices in 2005 makes me furious. I just want to burn all manmade structures to the ground.
Fifth Suggestion, Work on spending at least thirty minutes catching up on the days' goings on and let her talk you listen.
lol he forever driving reckless, I love him man
Louie got game! ;)
kris, how long will you guys be living there for?
the King.
Off to my last class and piccolo Pete is playing. I'm gonna miss this place
#CanIBeHonestWithYou your blog sucks
Watching More Than A Game
Recommend McFinnigans Pub in SA. If in Austin then Bull McCabe's Irish Pub. Two great places and they love their futbol!!!!!
If you don't vote for The Fray will sing at every major sporting event for a year
only you would run with lipstick on! Oh and pearls! Love it
or more like they take us for a walk! lol
somebody come get me out the house please before I pull my hair out....its that crucial
Thank you to Colin Powell for introducing the one and only joke into the Atlantic council dinner
#ConfiesoQue Sometimes I wanna live in Detroit c:
#Imagine You wake up, Zayn is lying close to you with his arms around your waist. You move, Zayn mumbles:''No, don't get out of bed yet!''
okay love
Hot in the city again...
If I have to "talk" to one more automated customer service system, someone is not going to see Tuesday.
Abt to head to the hospital to support my bro Dez, his son is abt to,enter this world.
Bears goin to the super bowl
I'm so excited to see you guys! =) even my parents vote for ya'll haha!
I treat people the way they treat me. If i'm treating you like crap, you'd know what that means.
Enjoying my first time pitching, yay!
Like this kid RT : RT : is it going to be on ESPN// naw, I don't want all that attention.
Thanks for the retweet!
hope you had a fun time!(:
I didn't know. Duh!!!
You are such a talented golfer!
Lord knows we'll always love each other, & wont admit it but time apart done made room for another
Was that a joke Garry?
Home. Watching 1000 ways to die. The exciting life of a rockstar. Lol.
requesting cruciferous vegetables is an indication of impending spinsterhood. shouldn't food network should warn against this?
Good luck with all that.
#WeWouldntWorkOutIf you absolutely despise of country music
I #FollowYou you follow me(:
I don't care if u cut of my ears.. I'll always love #music~
thank you!
"We can't quite decide if the world is growing worse, or if the reporters are just working harder."
lol hell yeah, I used to quit if I wasnt up by at least 21.
One more at six and I'm done-zo for the semester! ✌👏🙌💃
You're welcome! What are you likin' most?
please please please follow me !!!!<3
yes thanks pig!
friend me on facebook childofgod169 at gmail
I had to work until right now on my bday. I deserve a freaking medal or something...
About to head to work. Then home. Can't wait for payday! Gonna get headlamps for celica, drawing pens, and keen sandals =) yay
I've already said it, but congratulations! You're going to be a great Aunt.
when your coach puts some girl with a slower time than you as anchor on the A relay..
Aww. I have it on DVD. Lol
I live next to the loudest birds ever. Hey birds, why are you so loud?
happy to hear it! Thanks for chatting, and the nice note.
#playoff game-day in #Denver - Mammoth vs from @ 5:30pm today in West Division Semi- tix available
#wineweb starting.........now. teaching social media.
I use most of this RT : Americans use 16 thousand tons of aspirin each year.
maybe true however when u refuse to spend much money to improve your product u leave yourself open 2 speculation
I love your song s.o.s it's amazing
watching jane austen's persuasion movie montages on youtube
I've been surprised by how many wealthy people I've heard say recently that they have very little to no money in the stock market.
GOOD LUCK!
#ihatewhenskinnybitches think they all tht bitch you skinny wat do u have to offer skin&bones
CIO Quote of the Day, former Frito-Lay #CIO and Hall of famer Charlie Feld: “If you don’t like change, you’re going to hate extinction.”
any ideas or anybody to contact with a studio for First Friday? Much love!
Baby you light up my world like nobody else.
winner winner chicken burrito dinner haha
Thanks again for passing on the great INDIE contest info! :)
we have been trying to buy another copy of our episode of weird travels. are they available for sale yet?
judges mom had sex with an ass...
Here is a breakdown of this year's #Sponsorship Opportunities for The #PalmBeach #School for #Autism bit.ly/SponsorshipOpportunities
well, welcome! I'm excited to read your tweets knowing what a good writer you are! :)
so bad
Check out Tuesday night's dinner at Nassau County Sports Commission .
Finally going swimming. <3
A6. Just looking around this virtual room fills me with optimism!
O HAI SLEEP I LUV U.
"You do you boo boo" - always cracks me up!
Good. Those are the days that help us progress the most!
okay maybe I'm #latetotheparty or #jumpingonthebandwagon but I am seriously obsessed with
They are definitely going to layoff teachers, but too bad they won't be the bad teachers.
No, lmao she used to sit in front of me when you sat beside me.
Remembering A Grandfather's 'Best Gift' - NPR
“: I feel like she was using me , until she got her best friend back :/ #Used.” ? ....
my outfit today is actually looking good.
I dare you to try, ! u have a much longer drive to get here than me! anyone think we'll end up losing, here?
.my tummy is grumbling ;o
#PatriotsLockerRoomPlaylist all falls down
what if it was HUNGER GAMES meets 50 SHADES OF GREY meets FREEDOM meets HUNGER GAMES (again)? #bookhookin'
I'm in AA now. Justin moved up and skipped his last year of single a. I miss that guy, Andrew. Are you doing ok
stuck in the house all week
Get it done Tiger. The rise back to #1 will begin today
Praying for NYC and everyone on the east coast.
You can start a "jam session" with friends on garage band in the new version
Take a quick shower.
because it's a tidy allegory for the 99%. 100 boys compete, 99 die and the winner gets rich.
One day wit gloves
4 prize packs left
I could go for a knockout drag down.
Damn I go to School in Alabama never noticed how far that Shxt is!.
"there's gotta be somethin in the water 4 out of their 6 kids are gay!!!!"
Call me maybe.
check your DMs!
Really, the kids weren't that ducking cute.
Did you know CACs helped over 270,000 children suspected of being sexually abused in 2011? If we don’t #SAVECACS who will help them?
Well, he more than likely wouldn't see it until tomorrow anyways and I have to go to school tomorrow so I'll just wait.
I'm taking off my toes
#MySpecialPowerIs mind altering dimples (thanks )
It's Sunday Fun Day! No, not really. It's Sunday Productive Day. And here I go....
Yes! Would love to hear how small non-profit makes social work w/little to no $ + time
So when ya friends ask im not cha man just the closes thing ya had to a Boo Thang...
In general, the more difficult it feels, the more calories you burn.
“I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest; for it is Thou, Lord, only, that makest me dwell in safety.” ~Psalm 4: 8 ()
Tell me a joke. Women's rights. Hahaha I'm horrible
New site updates www.DebbieDownerEnt.com
:O My YouTube broke.. :\
How at around 7 I was dead tiered but now I'm wide awake…. o well back to the muzik
#ImAlexsGirl TREND IT
James Hook. RT: : James Hook?
Ok, hopefully I can make a lil some some up in there. let your people know im come with that.
my dad just sent me a picture of his poop... no more for him
I'm sure he has some equivalent chant. Don't all politicians?
I don't know what your talking about(:
the look is useless on flights. there's something in plane a/c systems that turns parents into social imbeciles.
Word's out! We'll have ARCs of our dystopian anthology DIVERSE ENERGIES @ ALA, w/ stories by + more!
nope but I got the bunny ears on it lol
Won the longest drive in the golf tourney this am. Thank G-d for that bloody Mary!!
Thanks! What did you get?
I'm not a bitch, you just don't deserve my kindness.
Good night everyone, enjoy the show. I want a roll! Oh yes, I hope Cantor get's the flu!
RT : Maybe I should watch the ranger game tonight considering there is a mob of blue and red outside my window
what's your favorite kind of music?...
-Heyy do we have to wear a tie n blazer today-!?
check out our artist!!!
My shoes have been untied lately
no se nellitzia! es el que dice FOX :S
i am like slow
Funny yesterday victoria: dont run from me, dont think we cant see u Me: what are u talking bout V: the fish c Me: o it swims not runs
Spun today: My Aim is True, This Year's Model, Armed Forces, Get Happy!!, Trust, Imperial Bedroom, Blood & Chocolate, Brutal Youth
Honored by Fearlessly Feminine Ministries having me speak on a "What do guys think?" Panel. Good job moderator, Frank Ruiz!
still iso google wave invite
Thanks! The presentation got a great response, and your research generated plenty of faculty interest
Thanks for sharing! Interesting. Like yr thoughts on citation as incentive for sharing & curation.
RT : I will be there!
RT : Paid coach may not be willing (or able) to give u 'insider' view. Mentor is a diff relationship.
been on aaron.tv lately?
lets tweet about how you nd the bulls r gonna bring us a championship :)
Had such a great time with the Black Eyed Peas and LMFAO last weekend at ESTATE * Can't wait until this weekend...
RT Tonight! Thrs Night Live 6-9 PM, Jazz in Atrium (Heather Paterson) Sketching in Galleries Michael Lagocki
how am i supposed to write 100 words about an Apple Butter Boil?
thanks for coming to ! Henna Party Workshop tomorrow! May God move!
T minus 13 hours until the avengers.
the only safe place is here now....
I used to be a huge TV fan, but I'm not following many series that I love. Can anyone suggest one?
Truth RT "Fuck the Big East." -
i will coming soon ask i finish exam
Pac/West launched it's Facebook page! About to create a professional profile in addition to my original. I think this is the best option.
Glad I'm not the only one that can't choose a brother.
Dear God. Thank you for inventing the best 2 things ever. Baseball pants. And Lax players. Amen;D
Now THAT'S Funny!
I see what you mean! :-)
Sloan/Harris/Gee/Jamison/Samuels ... sometimes we seem a very far way away.
#midwestfashionweek designers will be live on Fox 59 tomorrow morning Antonio Fermin at 7:45am
We have, actually -- great food!
Dick Head
We're reconstructing our website (which will be up soon!); the menu will be up there as well as a few other internet goodies.
lmfao, at what kyree is telling us on the phone!!
Thanks for sending that pic! Those do look great after 25 years! Do you remember where you got them?
sorry our account got hacked
Home alone:-((
I don't think it's a happy Friday if you need liquor this early :) RT : Happy Friday. Is it too early for liquor?
We hope to see everyone tonight @ Gaston Hall for 's 1-on-1 interview w/ CBS Sportscaster James Brown. Event starts at 7pm.
What a great idea! Select two characters, one setting, one prop, all clipped from a magazine, and GO!
Was good to see some creative playcallin from Wisc and Packer coaching staffs this weekend. Way to show your stones Brett and Mac
I CANT STOP LISTENING TO 11:11 ITS AN AMAZING SONG!
dont feel bad i did too lmfao
Jesus heather, eat a hamburger!
Me like
Hansen says "There is room on our side"
What's better than a fine cigar???
Seeing guys check out Tressa's ass is one of the funniest things.
I don't know, probably. I just wanted to get all excited about the mapping though! Whatchu mapping? What tools? etc.
Playing the Blues Brothers show at Universal.. 1 down 4 to go
has some cocktail glasses to die for
HS Ballers and Parents -- ... Find out what it takes to www.PlayCollegeBasketball.com !!!
More tremendous officiating in this year's playoffs. Kovy has a right to be incensed.
Don't have an #AdWars team? Looking for 9 brave soldiers to join my team, #AllThePresidentsAdMen. Do you have what it takes?
they probably have it at the Japanese market at 17th and U st
Wishing I were in the audience at #wits with , but happy to be listening to it online. A bit of funny is good on a Friday.
Well, wow, the feeling is mutual - good friends and good fans.
love u too(: text me
#Aries MB guy of the day: Prodigy
I don't even how i feel...
Thanks for following bro!
Olivia you're beautiful. <3
These woman on sportscenter cannot talk. Their studdering as a team
Do you need a mentor or a phychic? Mentors think they know more than they do, phychics make you feel better by guessing well.
i was born this way <3
#TrapMusic #RealShit if u can't relate listen to dat weak ass
It's likely for there to be a dance with life, a artsy reply to its inbuilt limits and concerns.
Haven't tweeted my man in a min. <3
You guys are so jealous! I'm at pump it up!
RT : "Get involved in ur miracle." So awesome! Don't just sit around praying for it, become a participant in it!
im not
yep! It's all our fault. Before we started this account, APD's reputation was sparkling. Lol
Mexican food leftovers
Do I make you horny baby?
I have school now
The elbow seen round the world. What happened to world peace?
There's a burning in my chest and my eyes feel heavy. Its ridiculous how much I miss you.
so I someone got a spam DM from you. You may want to change your password. :/
no way. I need the hours. Spend the night with me afterwards!
we are very sorry, but the event is completely sold out. Thank you so much for your interest! It will happen again in 2012!
People can say what they want about Comcast, but all I know is that I'm watching Purdue on ESPN 3 on my computer because of Comcast.
I'm studying social media in #MBU543 w/ We're learning about twitter chat and this is my 1st time participating with
it really did 😔
Excited to sit at table at IGNITE celebration tonight. Occupy Portland has us taking another route.
They gone PUT Miami OUT!!!!
Cs Magazine has nominated Salute Wine Bar and Cafe as one of the best restaurants in Chicago in the Italian category. Come check us out!
The team behind HTN is filming a new movie starting Monday - get updates at and
no I'm actually not.
She cooking dinner with cho pants.
It is all how you think about it...and it is all up to you
Speaking in New Orleans this week! A wonderful company hired me to train their staff on Mental Management - it's going to be a great week!
Follow me back; assholes!
I see PokerStars is raising the blinds on the Zoom game. Good PR if a player could sit in on a hand with their favorite pro.
Happy International Women's Day! :)
Thank ya old man! Making your debut to the web!
some times a man needs to explore a jungle just to find a woman! Ha!
Up early today headed to a Open Practice session at Ft. Meade Lanes.
was a GREAT show. Thanks for comin out!!!
On summer evenings my young wife and I would sit out front, high on potato wine, and watch the sun skitch its orange skirt over the horizon.
It's getting warm , everyone starts to act crazy
I guess he only wants White males who are rich & Christians. Leaves a lot of us out!!
Ha that's probably because it is criminal love!
the closer to summer, the less I care about school.
I have calmed down. We are united. And no one out there needs to know where I keep my spork.
office remodeling underway, it is going to be a difficult few weeks but will be worth it for a larger space.
I just let out a sigh of relief
Knowledge rests not upon truth alone, but upon error also.—Carl Jung
APUSH with , , , , and was a blast this year. I'll miss it<3
RT My students say drop RefWorks instruction pronto, give them Zotero or Mendeley.
my business
Q. Why do they bury lawyers twelve feet deep? A. Because deep down, they are really good guys.
great building materials picked up this week! 20 gallons mocha brown house paint, tile floor heating system, stone tile, all on the cheap
She's got eyes of the bluest skies As if they thought of rain I hate to look into those eyes And see an ounce of pain
Favorite quotation, period. RT : "Be the change you want to see in the world" -Gandhi
You in Times Square?
That way I'll make sure I get to do all the shit I want to do in my life span.
About to see Hunger Games!
Worst singing EVER!!!
After A Disaster Dont Lock yourself Out Of The World. Because after A hurricane Theres Always A Rainbow <3
Today 1848: St. John's Infirmary, Wisconsin's first public hospital, was founded in Milwaukee.
DJ 12 Tribe spinning Hip Hop, Top 40, and RnB.
I live in Detroit Michigan tho
Hey guys!!! #mofones will have another factory #weekend this weekend! yay!! all our artist friends making mofones in an #art studio in #LA!
Nothing makes me happier than simply being with you.
Drunk voicemail: someone misses me, the way I look into their eyes, and call them "baby." This person also thinks I'm on house arrest.
So trekking poles in checked baggage seems to guarantee a #TSA hand search.
thanks. updated it overnight - not paying attention obviously
what's baby rocket?
Spanish speaker expects her to learn a new language to date him? What's up with that?
so either january is national let's start rumours month or national let's piss everyone off month.
gah, so lucky. have a nice cup of hot cocoa for me ok? & enjoy your warm-under-the-covers day!
Retweet this if yu LOVE YUR FANS!!! because we support everything yu do and love yu no matter what! Yur so inspiring to me and othersIFLY !!
Upgraded to exit row window seat!?!
Saw two guys carrying a desk across Ventura Boulevard at Van Nuys. Just a normal Monday.
“: "If the best things in life are free, how come toilets cost money?" -Johnny Rutledge” Johnny is the fucking greatest
Seems cold..But baby no...Doesnt have to be..Microwaving our medal tragedy ~
How will I know if... finish that line :)
you have no idea how many times i catch mine down at meetings
We just wrapped up a great BOSU class! Have you tried this great way to burn calories?
Would u ever be down to star in a music video? Like nothing sexual lol. I'm looking for someone and your perfect :)
anyways whats happening
pretty sure he was. Sounded old, not really the joking type
he will he will. tryin to bring him to columbus, i'll tell you about it.
where you at big bro?
grad show + the next designer superstars + Sarah Burton () + + Princes Reema = ADRENALINE RUSH
I'm a good listener/when I hear myself speak
Who's ready for some Cheesecake?? We're celebrating National Cheesecake Day in the kitchen. Watch live at 9!
Well those could be taken out of context. :)
What's new with you, love?
aw damn wade! no you didn't get hung -_-
After silence that which comes nearest to expressing the inexpressible is music. ~ Aldous Huxley
One Direction Singing My Life Would Suck Without You.♥
Nice post. Scary stuff, scarier they dont let ppl know about new features that affect privacy. Scariest yet many ppl don't care.
are you feeling better my friend?
awesome. Made me smile and laugh. YEE “: Who cares if you're nervous? You're the only one who knows that. Ignore it and move on.”
How Romantic!
and a shout out to will prob be the last time i get to see her :/ shes moving on
GREAT NAFC MMA show Fri nite @ Milw's Potawatomi Bingo Casino! Congrats to all who entered the cage! Get ready for major league MMA in Aug!
Follow my friend and he will follow you back
Congrats on the goal!
Which one - the guy who won't talk to a female employee, or the girl who thinks she's god's gift to "comic book nerds"?
If you enter a black hole, you end up in a star trek remake remake.
keep Orly luv her fashion concepts! I would totally buy her stuff!
blahh blah blah
I have, they are great! :)
follow he only needs 126 MORE to reach 100,000 followers!!
I wish I could retweet this.
Just got stalked by a guy who wanted to sell me something it Waz a grown man in girlz scout costume D:
oh g i got stage frite today
Woot! We have a couple of ranking lists out. Need to start weeding out those teams not in the tourney.
Thank you! Love them!RT : big thanks to - #cupcakes were a big hit for 's birthday!
UFO on top of Rochester building?!
If anyone wants to challeng me on xbox live my name is (OpponentMrTKO)
And if you ain't know, I go by Tity-Two Necklace.
Its funny as hell when dude stops next to you blastin his system and his cd starts skippin....smh lmao!!!!!
Show just announced: April 18th @ THE SHADOW LOUNGE in Pittsburgh!
I like what I've seen from Nate Tice. He's making a run at the starting quarterback position.
is a fool ! lmao
BOUT TO LAY IT DOWN WITH MY HUSBAND AND HAVE SOME US TIME YAY I LIVE FOR THESE TIMES!
Get 20% off all items for Mother’s Day at , including great savings on cards and gifts for mom.
YAY is right!!! RT : Pitchers and Catchers = reported. Welcome back, baseball!! // YAY
goodmorning to you beautiful
Latricia working gate C38 at DFW flight 1003, that's how customer service is done!!!
Thanks Jordan - I am enjoying the process ;)
Several strong performances but Jean Adams as Mrs. Danvers is exceptional: deliciously warped!
Yay to my big bro (one of them anyway) for visiting me for Christmas! And June too!
my favorite is Love the Way You Lie and I also like Vienna :)
That awkward moment when ur on Skype at 3 in the morn and its the one night ur mom decides to "check on u"....-__-
My class starts at 9:30, but I don't show up til 9:35...
Kings Of Leon tickets at 4P; Justin from Blue October in studio 5:30
thanks! That was one wicked cough, miners lung?
I didn't get into any argument and am still on the rage train :)
Breck has twice been a runner-up but has never won a title.
I liked you till I found out you were a total bitch...
Sometimes I remember all the good times we had and memories we made then I remember all they'll ever be is memories sand we wont have more
I know you mean well...but sometimes I just wish you do what I ask and leave it at that. Not like I haven't done the same for you
#thedictator is my most anticipated comedy by far
Another successful clinic - most importantly we kept the quality of our patients' experiences high and addressed all their needs.
I am in a nasty mood tonight! I don't even know why! O well I guess people need to stay away from me!!
Back in Aruba mode.. Gym then work
Never stop dreaming. You will go far.(:
My.mother just called to ask a question she knew the answer too. Why?
Benny & The Breaks show plus Emma Wright birthday extravaganza tonight at
saw new x men today - pretty good! Hanging at the in-laws tonight..
My pleasure. Nice article!
Just witnessed the Mexican mullet, I'm speachless
Just signed up to attend the Women 2.0 Founder Friday San Diego Launch event for May 3, 2012, entrepreneurs, investors welcome, FREE:
bring me some 2morrow!!!!!!(:
ECOF looks thin...
[cont'd] farther in warmer air, and IIRC, 1998 was the warmest year on record.
"if it wasn't so poisonous, i would totally ride that!" (when talking about hidden penises)
i was listening to future- "turn up the lights" & on the 2nd verse he sounds like a Jamaican lol 😳😂😂😂😭
Happy Monday everyone! We'll announce the winner of #GuessJacksScore at 10am central. His score from Friday was 735
Exactly. PNR data in CRS cloud is best proof that Safe Harbor & enforcement of EU data prot. law are complete failures.
NBC has a really cool story on right now about the raid to kill Bin Laden
where you live pansy? I'll make you eat your teeth
Some Great football today... Are you ready for CES, What is going to be the hotest new product???
did i seriously just wake up to someone walking by my apartment whistling the national anthem??
we on dat new shit..what yall know bout ???
thts messed up.
#FF, if you're interested, the face behind 's tweets:
Mane the Devil trying to mess me up early..but I got the Victory.
the power of #love is much more greater than d power of
2nd thought = I wonder if she does anal....
The joy of eating well and aging well! Choose colorful fruits, veggies, whole grains and lean meats to feel great inside and out.
love the new handler!
currently listening to brilliance Switch Switch by on
Anyone at LAX right now? Delayed flight caused missed connection. Long wait for next flight. Hanging at terminal 7 at Karl Strauss.
I feel that as a graduation present to Kendra.you should do a sex para sometime in the near future.that is all.
Nick Drake
yea I qot the one on my upper bck done ina house for 40 but I cant find a dude that tats out his house smh
I know not what things you speak of woman.lol
This coming Monday the 12th I will be at F. Scott's Jazz Bar playing solo. Come you and enjoy some tunes!
Dirk brick
R.I.P to my cuzn. She left us too soon I know you up there looking down on us kid 
Take chances in life. You only got 1 chance to live your life. #KeepStriving ...
all I want is a husband and babies
CeeLA, this is The Man you are speaking to. Are you in Montreal for the 2nd show. I am Rhianna's God Father.
doing some awesome Welcome campaigns using
Destructoid Pirate T Shirt
There's another project I got that's pretty interesting. Anthology about an asylum co-edited with some guy named Ben Ethridge.
Okay really i just saw as on my timeline it was a profile picture im mean really lady dang 😖😡👎
We have gone Pink! Join Team Germain for the Susan G. Komen race for the cure on May 15th!
It took away some of the magic to hear them at Crew should know better.
at the shop watching naruto shes so many episodes behind
Congratulations John John Florence. Volcom Pipe Pro Winner...
You should hear! It hit Leander a bit ago..just opened door & peeked..it's calmed down..electricity only went out 4 a while!
Good night twitter world<3
Got my free copy of Flash Builder 4 installed. Thanks Adobe!
you will find a way !!
Tornado warnings in Kaufman, Rockwall Counties until 4pm.
I really need to stop tweeting and start on this ap!!
Get Your movers today! Prices starting as low as $50/h!!! Disassembly and reassembly is always included!!!
Ballgame! Your boy Timmy won more playoff games this year than Aaron Rodgers and Ben and Matt Ryan and Romo. Who's better?
Whats your favorite song?
RT : "My religion is very simple. My religion is kindness." ~Dalai Lama
Artist Lucian Freud leaves $156 million in will - paper
COCO LOUNGE IS ON CRUNK ALERT TONIGHT!! THE SA SPURS WILL BE REPRESENTING!! HURRICANE CITI ON DECK!!
make my day and follow me?<333
what do you do for Starbucks?
mr brown daughter.
need to get these thoughts out of my head because drinking just makes them harder to forget.
Portland, you make us proud. 'Up the Yangtze' is a hit--we love that a Canadian documentary tops the term for screening attendence.
The first 2 weeks of the year are always the busiest at the gym.
we can fly to never never land xo
I'm disappointed in myself for not knowing about these drinks. What are they?
Hey Rock!! whats up man, hey ive actually looked into getting my personal training liscenses. What about u recommend?
Are we going to count the debt we take out for the Vikings stadium as counting toward the budget deficit, too?
will be tough... Young players, wide-eyed at Staples
Step up and do what others will not do and make the difference in the world by being all you can be and know you did your best~ steve dorsey
just cut a 12 minute interview down to 5:30.
Nice!! Returning to class for your final week?
Ohh whenever you want! :D
I don't see why you talk shit. It makes you looks stupid and needy.
Qupe 2009 Bien Nacido Syrah: delicious, up to Qupe's Syrah reputation. Light on the front, big on the finish with a little bite.
#someday you will realize how much i love you&how you #inspire me and follow me/tweet me!iloveyou 2
At the for a screening of Chuck Norris' Delta Force (unless I misread that email).
*squeeze* I'm always here for you :D
The Spaces between my fingers are there for yours to Fill In
Already got dibs on the living room couch. But this loveseat's got your name on it.
Im very honored! RT : In final Pos1 vote wins endorsement of with 62%
is happy not to listen to neightborhood fireworks because of the rain.
Can fill out welfare/ food stamp application under a minute but can't fill out a job application
You know that moment when you take pizza out of the oven, and know you should wait, but can’t help yourself? Yeah that just happened.
Checking out the new drive-thru Starbucks by my office. Seems easier to just go inside.
B.C.N. Will be attending the Michael Jordan celebrity invitational golf tournament @ aria city center in L .V. from 3/31 to 4/3
I did send an email to provide details. I would appreciate a prompt response.
we sure do
Decided to just hibernate in my room until I croak. Appropriate grad school plan? Thinking yes.
Oh yeah fashionably late trifecta haha loved it
she kicked my sis out she livein wit my grandmotha for the week my motha wnt her to think n she threw all her clothes away!
I wouldn't have noticed that if you didn't point it out
Taco tuesday!!!
“: Ready for Exchange Professional!!! ” welcome Cindy
Most eyes on the most stories. Free content. Advertiser supported. That’s how to do it, , Pay walls tried. Failed.
I'd rather do homework than read #NYR tweets.
Show me your face u fucking asian....
do you have a computer outlet out there?
So tired. -_-
I mean the school work and teacher not the year
Oh FFS Let's get it together!
hi pretty, miss you!
So, now you have me watching #DrWho on netflix. lol.
Mos Wanted Crew killed it!!
Canada! I can't wait to see you!!
got a couple of notes done...then tutoring and more after class.....
I just want my daddy that's all. Guess you can't always get what you want huh?
NEED MORE FOLLOWERS?!?! FOLLOW & SAY "I NEED FOLLOWERS" AND I GOT YOU !!! OVER 10,000 + FOLLOWERS & IM~~>
#bandoftheday is post the vid and pic on our fb when you can!
never been to co co sala but would try it! Looking forward to Nov. You and could come early for the rally on the mall.
Poking your head in is the best feature of Twitter, IMO. Probably because I do it all the time! :)
Yay! Tweet with us!
class is 2day. $7.00 followed by the best Bible Study with Pastor at 7pm - Auditions coming soon!!!
your phone trippen because you dont know how to hit up your wifey !
#imagine when and follow back:/ like that is ever gonna happen:/ </3
It is hot as shit
hi Sky.
over 40 traders in our chatroom right now making a lot of money on AQLV
thank you! Love to meet you too!(:
Ieen got shit better to do
Good boy
Shots indeed!!
Our NEW Be Belle website Just Launched! Specializing in Wedding & Event make-up! Chk us out at www.bebellebeauty.com
LOOKS LIKE IM TAKINIG OVER TWITTER :)
Bored and nothing to do.:(
states that parents are first line of defense to keep kids safe from abuse
A few more minutes and the demo pit winner will be announced. We have a great crowd at the end of the day!
I wonder what the kid in front of me on the bus put as his language on his application to Purdue. Ebonics perhaps?
huh?? not sure what you mean.
Parent: "Hey, we need to talk." Me: *million things run through my mind, what did they find out about?* Parent: "Stop leaving the lights on"
sonoran hot dog making its ESPN debut
- "wait.. But his is bigger than mine.." to
just show them that you're logged in on your phone. That works too.
Having to convince university police that your bag doesnt contain an explosive.
ok Roenick is really irritating right now
Have fun in KY! Wish i was there or you were w/us! Let's just hope they don't tweet about us!
no but I'm bout to now!
yea she dmed me(:
Just One Tweet can make a night! :) RT #SongICanRelateTo Give Your Heart A Break and Just One Boy
Dear , Please Stop Coming Up On My Pandora. Thank You , Superior Apparel
sure, thanks
Wha? Vit C city, lady. You know home boi is always welcome
Good luck xoxo
#scoremobile is blowing up my pocket with the offense in this #Brewers game today!
"It's not what you look at that matters, it's what you see." -Henry David Thoreau
i hope he didn't freeze that friggin chicken again............
Thanks for the reminder!
Damn my charm should be illegal , that's the 5th girl today that gave me the "diablo papi" face
Has indie rock always sounded like adult contemporary and I just never noticed before?
Looking forward to tonight's episode of #BigBangTheory!
*High Five*
You're right!! It'll only be like four days late. Also they eloped, so that means all rules are off, right?
at first i thought would be funny, then i realized his failed career as a comedian trasnformed him into a golf blogger.
I need to see Burnham in concert again :P It's been since 11/11/11 was the last time I saw them in concert
Women want to be listened to. Pretty basic, but seemingly tall order.
<< Sweethearts always win!
I'm spraying it repeatedly with Windex
Colorado has a snowday and I have 5 hours of class straight.
#RIPDonna Extremely saddened by the loss of legendary musician Donna Summer! Her songs of love, loss, & heart will be her beautiful legacy.
Twain: "The inability to forget is infinitely more painful than the inability to remember." Create a culture of forgetfulness.
Come to www.watchnhllive.com to watch all your favorite hockey teams play live online enjoy the games!!!!!
I am woman! I am invincible! I am pooped!
mention me im up & hella bored
that would be my guess. But who knows
I keep losing followers. Haha. Ops?
Submitting press release for www.iheartonenote new member contest.
#SignsSheGetFoodStamps When they say "we got food at home"
Nick from last note felt the ghost spirit here and he had no idea it was haunted!
I encounter realize it's a matter of knowing where to look, not necessarily some certificate. I've been doing research ...
this is so sweet :-)
love drinking cold coffe its yummy
#FF Way honored! My novel, Tomorrow They Will Kiss, scores another 5 star review! amzn.to/9SBWUL Thank you kind readers.
No one has any excuse: Andrew Haigh's WEEKEND is on Netflix Instant! WATCH IT unless you want to see Cuntessa Aubergine (aka me) yell!
No. That's danielle. She is a friend of mine:) my photos are on my twitter.
#PopUps EXPECT DELAYS multimedia #art #installation by V Bonet @ 630 Main & PRIMITIVE POP SERIES by R Robinson @ Broadway/9th
bringing back the 90s!
Going to the Vancouver B.C. and Seattle show! July 27th and July 28th :) x
TONIGHT 9pm BREW-HA-HA WBC. Steve doing standup along w Chuck Booms and Victoria Bussberg
If anyone has other podcasts recommendations I'm all ears. I listen to lots of them geek related. You can never have enough options :-)
stupid football is depriving me of watching on 60 minutes. Ugh
I've never been so pissed.
im not. ;o
We just had a very civil debate on FB. Amazing. 88 comments and no name calling.
It's not too late to book your Holiday Party - there are still options. Think Brunch or Lunch or after work cocktails & appetizers.
Dealing with my caffeine addiction by drinking a pot of freshly ground Kona coffee.. m
Chillin at today. I sometimes forget are real people.
HELP YOUR HEALTH – SUPPORT YOUR COMMUNITY! CSA – Community Supported Agriculture. For a fee you buy local, seasonal food directly from a fa…
It's time we do our part in helping our community. Email for more information!
Q1) Agree this is happening but in my experience it is department and team managers directing it. Dept and project portals
... in vacation mode, seeing Chicago with Singaporean pharmacists and old friends.
Tryin c what GTown gone do 2nite follow Oaks on twitter @ oaksgbgh
Come see me at booth #40 & the Awesome at booth #41(♥Ha! How did the Universe arrange that union? Neighbors!♥)
you here this weekend, right?
My feet are so yellow 😣
Do any of the four types of unintentional "innovation assassins" lurk in your company?
clear penalty, no?
Would be holding another panel or are you simply attending?
Yes, I throw pennies away. so what?
Where can we get 'Love Pastry' shirts? I really want one!
everything I pin or comment on she likes it, re pins it and shares on. 2 sec after I made him my friend she requested.
You know today is going to be awesome.
yea boi! Happy birthday :)
Join us for Belly Moves Prenatal Yoga with next wed! Or join me tonight, can't wait!!
JUSTIN PLEASE NOTICE ME!!!!25
Still looking for Men of Steel (and some women) for our Fall Premier! Contacta for more details. Auditions being scheduled!
Bank o'Canada removes women fr $50 bill:famous 5 fought to be persons & Therese Casgrain 1st female leader of pol party. Arcti ship instd.
thank you! I'll follow you too! I'm excited to use it! It's so funky!
What up Bro? Hey I'm just chilling at the Crib hooking up these Turntables...
We will be in the South Milwaukee Heritage Days parade today! Make sure to stop by and see us! =)
#AERA2012 co-presenting a communication PD workshop at 8:00. Let's do this!
Francis, instead of criticizing the chef, why don't you post YOUR the 5 courses you felt would have been more representative?
'member Marc, u bragged "when I started with Huntland & they told me to get that monthly check to that elected official, I STOPPED THAT" :-o
Let's go #Blackhawks! It's do or die (again).
Wish this happened more often at other places. RT Kids eat free all day today . One child for each paying adult.
A person who keeps his opinions to himself will seldom be wrong.
Doing taxes. Blech.
I like people to be jealous of us.
I love the sport, I am part of the sport but it is taxpayer money. Where's my sponsorship? I'm a taxpayer. I'm divided on it
Getting halfway done with straightening my hair and saying "Screw it" and throwing it up in a bun.
Last class finishing up with the L-J pretest. This is the 100 important vocabulary words for 7th grade.
In case you wondered--we're home from Israel and Jordan. In November we're going to Israel and Egypt.
can you follow back thx
Miley Is Naturally Beautiful, what more can I add...
Me too!
Im threw fuckin around im off
Wow, request for a belly dancing cake, and an invite to the event! That's a first!!
#stopkony 3 years ago I coached a famous actress for a film about the monster. Shame the film didn't get made.
Schools over in a week, and my whole year has been ruined.
i know, i know, i'm always working.
Can twitters fly?
Vamp up time baby on
Bumping Asap Rocky
#kosher Earlier today I was accused of being racist for asking if a competitor breaking an advertising policy was kosher.
Congratulations! That's wonderful news. :)
Morning! Morning!
Thanks for the tip MB. I don't mind looking like a dork.
Are you in contact with your relatives there?
Okay great! Where does she sit? I need to leave something on her desk (:
Boy Next Door
Thanks to for representing The SCoop at the #naacp #teensummit today!
Hey thanks so much!! I'll go check it out :)
Nobody's replying to my texts. Guess I'm in for the night.
yeah she's probably a cunt
MayDay Inc. doing all the task you don't have time to
Tomorrow back to eating healthy again!
it's a sloppy study and blogs repost it as "proof" with no acknowledgment of that
Everything is always okay in the end. If it's not, it's not the end.
All I found in the fridge was applesauce, but at least it was the cinnamon kind. LOL! Enjoy your comfort food! :)
sweet! Cuz I have a bunch. Just got another one today in fact.
Let's go Nuggs! Get it together!!!!!
No dessert. I am in training for a raft trip.
with jungle juice?
Ha! RT Know what? Komen can still suck it. They crossed the Rubicon.
Out eating with my soon to be husband, <3
not that easy lol .
Finally off work :)
I Think that all the dreams come true,because taught me to #NEVERSAYNEVER♥
my cable went out for a second too... Ugh!
I just declared next Sunday "Take a Jew To Church Day" to help them become completed Christians! Love you Ann and Jesus!!!
It ain't wack if they know what they doing with it .
What one girl won't do another one will....
Hittin the mall is becoming a routine activity these days
Wow! The Dekalb county court is truly diverse! 5 languages, 4 men, 3 women + the ONLY Hispanic judge in Georgia cc
okay bye Aubrey , carry on with your day.
off to work,so i pretend to work ,so they can pretend to pay me...
Avoid northern state heading west there's a huge accident
Wants to attend the ABFF, but it is just too expensive
water and Pittsburgh. :) boom!
When iCry its not bCuz im upSet : its bCuz im mad az hell .
A. Peterson (ACL, MCL) finished 1st in wind sprints w/ teammates this week. Coach Frazier said "he's doing great and we're optimistic."
go get it it's there! “: I desperately want to watch Bridesmaids right now.”
I will be there love!!
you read it 😳
hahah! It's inhumane. RT : only recording 579 songs in one day. you know... The usual. Hahaha
watching Ali vs Foreman. Ali would have beat this nigga without the rope-a-dope.
Wait, can go down?
bwahahahahahahahaha little goon
blerg...time to start filtering SXSW tags
I love that we live in the time of
Had an amazing long weekend with my fiance - and now it's back to work for both of us!
Cameron Diaz turns 39 today. I like her and think she should go without the makeup. She looks more unique that way.
Definitely good to support what they're doing @ the Loft, but it's also opening @ the Gaslamp.
well he tossed the original Sour Patch Kids (Animist orphan squatters) into the sea as well
My students will be interested to hear that #OccupyWallStreet protesters staged a read-aloud of "Bartleby" in Zuccotti Park in October.
Thanks bro! Let me know if you cop anything i will hook it up! Use "Steven" When you purchase as a discount code!
I would be disappointed in you but I have some here myself.
I still listen to 11:11 by ! anyone else??:)
We're cooking up fish tacos tomorrow on the show. Yum! Tune in to get the recipe!
my favorite part was when it was 's solo
You're a cold but tasteful man! I think it was Ben & Jerry who told us that cold weather doesn't hurt ice cream sales.
woop woo! alrighty lmk what you wanna do cause we never went on our chillis date! and im broke but I get paid this fridayo
Back to work now:)
“: im with SD and he is celebrating like they won the superbowl” - Dork.
lets go!! When & where is it??
#amWriting at Drip Coffee House in Dallas.
It's not the right things we do occasionally, rather it's the right things we do consistently that change our lives. -Joyce
Currently holding down 4th place in the Ideablob contest, looking for a weekend bump over the next few days-www.ideablob.com/ideas/4284
thanks, appreciate it
Big S/O to the boys from Thanks for a great show.
Got a reallllyyyy cute dress! :)
my eyes are killing me from all the dust!
Alex Haupt calls me white girl :l
What a gorgeous start to the day! Come out and get a storage unit 50% off for your first two months!
thanks man :D
Not running the LA Marathon, but I am wearing track pants. What do I get for that? Nothing? Anyone? Is it nothing?
A shower, makeup session, and a glass of water.
Thanks Helen!
Chinese company to buy Weetabix
Maybe for you!
stay the fuck from there
Can't be nice to everybody without someone getting the wrong idea.
When sum1continues2 hate, I find no reason2 get mad or upset.If u don't like me remember it's mind over matter; I don't mind &u don't matter
speaking of pushover. Are you coming over tonight?
Can you elaborate on website design? Like HTML? Or UI? Or graphic design?
I love early release days :)
We'll miss you and too! But don't even worry about it. and I are crashing all your events :)
I hate when people say "Your mom" after everything you say
Preparations for tonight's are in a full swing! It's going to be a great night!
haha i figured tht out im doin hw it suck the dick
like this
Be your best self and bring out the best in others.
tickets will be at ticket outlets by the end of next week...check back for the list of outlets
This is cool.
I don't think so. :(
Made mine too! Well done...
Was off the grid this weekend. It felt great.
If you are in NYC next week go check out auction.Money goes to more awesome public and educational programming
By the way... #shoutout to the so delicious. They even have delicious Tofu Bratwurst for all you herbivores.
Today is #10/10/10! Help celebrate its 10th year of supporting classrooms by following them. Pls RT. /via
Stayed up way too late to be awake since 6am. But gotta get as much work as possible done today.
If I forgot who I am, would you please remind me.
she's ktfo right now
why do u work mornings now?
only if he can pitch the 7th and 8th every fucking night
#IfYouKnowMeWell , then you'll understand my situations.
Stuck on jury duty today. They can't pick people from the unemployment roles, that would be too easy.
Giving a tour of the honors program today. YES. I have always wanted to be a tour guide.
What makes a great place to work? What was the best company you ever worked for, and why? Join the conversation at noon
when is cody goin to be on punk'd???
Duck duck goose as a state of existential awakening. I only know who I am when I become goose. Then comes the chase.
At least there weren't any zobies - that we know of...
Finishing up an Information Security project today and head for Bali, Indonesia for the Holiday Season. Happy Holidays to everyone!
I hate futs
I'll send you an email :) Have fun today!!
right with you there.
omg I know. I'm in the same building as Thom!!!
Working on SPARTA -THE SHOW EPISODE N.4 www.syndicateradio.tv !!! LOVE YOU ALL!
Hey Boston. How do you like them apples?
thanks for the lead to The Band Perry. I just didn't know.
hope your Saturday Is sunshine and flowers!!!!:)))
RT: : All people want is $$$ & im so tired of it. For real. <~~ SO damn true, sadly.
I love your twitter name #justSayin :)
What's your play count, dawg? xD
yeah. he seems cliche like that. then he'll buy her nice silicon parts and lots of gold and greek columns for the house...
Eric, the smooth-talking, ladies man, devises the perfect strategy to win over his ex-girlfriend Abby, in the gripping thriller 'Fair Play'.
Happy B day
Cant wait to enjoy some sun this weekend. Makes me want to be a Trendy Fox
Working on news story & need Bodymedia users in Pittsburgh who R running the marathon, ½ or relay. Contact us as
MVC presentation by is the very best so far. Wish every PHP developer could hear it.
Congrats to producer genius for his #Broadway production of #Godspell being featured on the front page of the #NYTimes!
Levi leer Mixtape release & Pastor Troy movie release TONIGHT!!!!! @ #PearlBistro Be there!!! #TeamSelfish !.!
Heavy rain and cloud to ground lighting here at this time..
I hope my bae is having a wonderful day. I'm hoping to skype later...
Who Am I: That quintessential verse that defined who you are as an artist. Every MC has this verse...or at least should have this verse.
There is a term for vocab experts. Vocabularian-Someone who gives much or undue attention to words. who knew?
Embrace the gray!
they all work?
Last night I learned it's possible to play "The Twist" loud enough to make one's ears ring. It's a terrific feeling.
Us too! Let us know if they make it online, we would love to link to them.
VERY well said!
they wouldn't let me get my stuff
I am watching Melancholia. I feel like I am being fucked in the brain by the Tristan chord.
nigga just said he had one of mine. Now its I ain't seen u with no one. Nigga which one is it compulsively lies
RT : Find our Top 100 Best Free #Kindle #Books which is updated daily on #Squidoo. #novel #DigitalBookToday -...
THEY SPELT IT WRONG. WHAT IS WRONG WITH THEM
THERE IT IS AGAIN.
It's safe to say put on one of the best performances to date. New songs are shaping up nicely.
Just telling you the truth,
: You had me at cheese platter.
Twerking to the beat of Europe's "Cherokee"
Iconoclast of the Day: Jimmy, for gamely continuing to crack corn despite the fact that no one seems to care.
lia sophia 's Elena Kiam Dishes on How to Make this Holiday Season Gem-tastic We chatted with the Creative Director of lia sophia, Elena
Oh. My. Holy. Shit.
Hawks showed up tonight
Everytime I see a horrible driver, I wonder how they ever made it out of the birth canal.
How are you??
No problem, hope you have a great weekend--supposed to be nice weather.
I'm ready for ya, come on! $2 craft beers!
Enjoying some seriously sticky Natto & brown rice. M. Pungent and delicious!
Just sent the Easter cards to the grandparents - sometimes I forget how much a handwritten card means.
wow, that is quite unexpected! Email me:
God Is Soo Good He Keeps Opening Doors!!
Note the importance of the Oxford comma in the last tweet. Come on AP
Don't hand me shit then except me to give you gold cause you can go to #teamfuckyourself #teamfollowback ;)
yes that's right. Never know! But I'm so happy they got through another week. They are kicking butt!
Here's where my tolerance ends: neither of them is into soccer... so I'm trying to convert them.
's Hair Is Dope o;
The city that reads!
Hahaha I Have My Reasons And You Don't and You Still Had Chalk On Your Butt#Memories.(:
Plleeaase someone tell me a bedtime story !
with the fudge! The best part.
try to hide your boners when u walk out of class, it's not a good look
Might be taling to you then! Soon.
Light, sound, & smell- keeps ghosts away! My candle making at home is great!!!
My boyfriends in the hospital with a bad case of non-existence.
Ew the stupidest party in 8th grade history
Yes!!! RT :  RT : Thank you SO much for saving the St. Patty's Day parade!!! I love you!!
You have controlled your fear. Now, release your anger. Only your hatred can destroy me. ~ Darth Vader #MarchMad(scientist)ness
Okay so i say i hate when people assume. and i do. and yet i assume so much tbh
First thought-take a look at the work for hire section in Nimmer on Copyright. What cases does Nimmer cite? +
Listening to music and talking to u lol, wbu?
So great to finally meet you in person! Hope to find time to chat soon :) cc
let #pace nyc know about our $1 slice special! Tonight until 9pm! 41 john street
RT : I'm looking forward to the Komen Foundation's logical next fundraising effort: Pink cans of New Coke. (Gold!)
oh stop with the big words! What is this 'homework' you speak of anyways?
This cat want 13 hundred for this car but yet has 13.00 on it
#LetsGo #Mountaineers Beginning of a
have yu talked to her?
machine-gun range gets a steady stream of visitors and will never use that range again. 2 many newbies with too much firepower
We already have Beyond the Codices (updated, expanded) and Book 12 of the Flor. Codex from Jim Lockhart, ready to add. Need grant!
think we are good on noodles , but some drinks would be awesome if you can manage it ;) thank you !
s/o means shout out....
Do I look a fucking mother to you
nah i did a different one.
Thank you!
yea i love that kid no homo
yeaa I feel you me too but I bruised my collar bone at practice today and boy does it hurt lol
Love it! Congrats!
I owe you lunch :)
actually LOVING it!!! Battery life is a little shaky, but overall, its a pretty awesome piece!
Think about it
good work :)
what's your favorite photo community? we <3 , but want to find others!
You can now shop select pieces from my collection on the SUCCARRA Facebook page! Go check it out and tell me what you think...
The willingness to listen, the patience to understand, the heart to care & just to be there that is the beauty of a lady! Happy Women`s Day!
I'm erasing all the unwanted drama out of my life, because at the end of the day all I'm trying to be is happy....
MSR Faculty Summit here I come. Sneaking in w/o a phd... Sessions look very good.
My real one: Stranger note as you walk by, as you are now, so once was I. (con't)
Do you know there are many opportunities for the GIS Freelancers on GIS Extensions Market?
Time and time again we need a little break
No need to see new faces keep that circle small and tight
eva's
Sadly, I'll be out of town for the show, but I hope the kids dance well & have fun.
Fish fry and pumpkin soup w greens...today...bring your Friday face!!
I need a life
Philadelphia's school situation is beyond crisis mode at this point. We all need to present our best ideas now
i looked like shitt
indianapolis dryvit contractors, indianapolis eifs contractors, indianapolis stucco contractors, indianapolis dryvit repair, indiana eifs
I GOT HOES TRYNA BE LIKE ME!! Awesome!!
its time for me to play some
you WOULD like that. :(
you're awesome.
Everybody is looking for something...sweet dreams are made of ________
Attention all Titans Gym members refer a friend to Titans Gym get a free month on us.
i appreciate your support
Where therr's a will... There's a way...
What's Romney gonna do when he discovers that two of his corporations are gay and wanna marry each other? Huh?
RT Among cablers, CNN first w/the news of Betty Ford's death; MSNBC second; Fox third.
I want to offer my love and respect to the end
ah, yeah they is a wee bit of size difference. Woah, how big will she get? I like the name
it is amazing the amount of expensive fetish gear they've concocted for what should be basic locomotion. fools & their $...
I can't write anymore!!!! rewriting is killing me... brain is dead
Beautiful day. Enjoy it
come on over
Fun fun fun!
Now in that stage of guilt for saying some of the stuff I said/did tonight. Completely insane. What a night.
Thanks for including me in the Daily today.
unfortunately CA law requires a T7 growler, no others.
Catching up on some rest this morning before another really busy day preparing for this weekend's opening of "The Cup".
Excellent food and atmosphere. RT : Has anyone tried Bookbinders in Richmond?
#Chiefs sign QB Brady Quinn
People who weren't going to vote Obama still aren't going to vote 4 him after today, BFD. Everybody else better get off the damn fence.
Sitting under da dryer waiting for my hair to dry... Getting sleepy af
meeting Hiro From msr Tonight for a drink!
this guy is an awesome director!
cheerleading competition today :D
WHAT! Are you ok?
Rt @#iranelection Everybody in South-Korea please wear green tomorrow at the football match against Iran. COPY THIS
. Mine too but could be timing. Gotta put it out there while your peeps are listening.
as much as I'm not a country fan.. I secretly agree with you!
And today we added Bottle Tree Blonde to the line-up (we're officially over 200 brews for EABF!)
Philly's clue for the #LinkinParkScavengerHunt will be at Lincoln Financial Field, right? We do call it "The Link", after all.
The page is now linked with Twitter and Facebook. Unity is beautiful!
Silent stats class, this girl come in blasting Chris Brown. No one can think straight.
Just arrived at the hotel in Muncie. Now to get something to eat - I'm starving!!!!
TWITTER IZ ACTING DUMB Y IDK
Unfortunately, no...
okay now-that's kinda wierd...
DOA Sec. Mike Huebsch testifies it will cost $500,000 to remove tape at Capitol and $6 million to restore marble due to residue.
At school was deemed too academic, in real life too creative..
It's such a beautiful day here in Nashville! Loving the weather so much!
Stressin over shit I can't control is
Let's hope the NFL starts back up. I have a need for sports. almost time for it to start up once more.
okey know u think we are crazy sorry hihi.........
needs to do a Loranna Bobbit on little Jesse & put him down a running g arbage disposal
Can I Get Refiilllllllllllllllll
I vibe to piss em off & I know errday
GO FOLLOW ! SHE WILL FOLLOW BACK,
congrats! You deserve it!
Slice of the week North Ave: BOLOGNESE!!!
so true my friend
My peoples gave me the best bday card w/ librarian jokes. Thanks you guys!
One thing that I hate is waking early.
I followed :)
Chilled spring aspargus soup-YUM!! Lobster rolls for 9 bux! Come see me @ the Y-CAFE. Open to the public 7am-6pm. Come see me!! :)
Fortunately, on Feb 14th I'm going to move to Uzbekistan where Valentine's Day is cancelled. via
shame on how u act wirh ya grown self smh
you're a sweetheart. That's good, the more love he- and you- have, the better!
Philly airport has free Wifi, I kinda love this.Still doesn't make up that I didn't sleep on the flight here. hah.
Hmm...post a new album to the site or go to sleep?
We're still navigating a move toward teams - some led by staff, some led by lay ppl. In reality, we drive a hybrid.
sidenote, everyone should tune into espn and watch my school lose to FSU. just sayin.
Perfectly perfect Colorado weather.
do you want to be in my vid?
c'mon y'all!! Go request DONT BE SHY by on Radio Disney!! Bless ur heart if u do... Bless their heart if u don't! Go now!
Watching 'Blow Out'. Wish I would've sprung for blu-ray.
Simply: yes. If you won't stand up for the serial comma, who will? /sarc
Don't worry bout the weather! We got Hot BBQ/Fried Catfish and the Muddy Udders Tonight. That will Heat Things Up! JC
We have a free shuttle to Dropkick Murphys after game. 2 for 1 drinks before the game. Are you attending?
I can have a vintage-prohibition-speakeasy-jazz club- Halloween themed wedding, right? That totally works...
my pants...
I love you too!
WE R BAGS BAGS R US
thats how we roll nigggaa, we know everything..
it's all good!! watch out... can become addicting...haha
I think everyone should give Jonathan Franzen a break. Hes a decent writer, who cares if he doesn't like Twitter?
Must be tough being a sideline hoe....no playing time
Wine with the Fleishman office, then calling it a day! TGIF
will start investigating; know if they're primarily a specific method?
Breaking: Responding to popular demand Chef Geoff announces opening of new Chef Geoff&#39;s inside an EXISTING Chef Goeff&#39;s
Hi! Its beens so long! I miss you. We need to catch up
if target does not have my book
That's the truth!
Oops! We've been neglecting you Tweeps! Whats' everyone working on these days? Hm??
Hey i am sad never RT`ed me she is my idol luv her:(:
Requesting , , and T.O. time immediately. I cannot wait until June 2.
The Youth Council, and our Collaboration committee, looks forward to working with and youth groups in Mke.
Looking fwd to stopping by tmrw to sign stock of I WORE THE OCEAN IN THE SHAPE OF A GIRL & visiting
Salon Design Tip: Color bounces. try to pick floor and wall colors that are warm. Warm browns, warm grays, clays, terra cottas!
Mitch McConnell today--Republicans will not confirm anyone to protect consumers; they will stand with Wall St. banks. Party of 'no' goes on
Silently Raging In Class....By Myself
All IU has 2 worry about is recent probation/Bobby Knight's shame & sucking for all these years.
My whole sunday is going to be devoted to nothing but homework.
Updated My Profile #swag Im Super Dooper Uuuper tired. #cool going to kick this besh out of my house soon ;D #lol bye
Momma's first mother's day in heaven...celebrating her at
Attn Summer Ball guys! What event is considered the best tournament in ur region - during the month of June?
Either be hot or cold. on or off. those lukewarm people does the most damage bc it catch you off guard
thanks for noticing homie. love you! a miami latina can play a white trash myrtle beach hoe too. see?
Emotionally: I'm done. Mentally: I'm drained. Spiritually: I feel dead. Physically: I smile.
": Bummed "Smash" isn't a Friday Night Lights spin-off." me too!
If you're out of sight therefore you're basically out of reached like a missing chromosome anything that cant penetrate has 2 ricochet
smh lol next is fighting over pub
I have no clue what 20 degrees celsius is. America fails and doesn't use the metric system. What is it in fareinheught?
is not only an embarrassment, she (and her ilk) is downright dangerous.
TRYIN TO GET SOMETHANG GOING WITH THE VIDEOS & INTERVIEWS
Yes please.
Thanks, Allison! Glad you enjoyed it!
Turns out I'm 5th cousin (4 x rmvd) to Robert E. Lee & 3rd cousin (6 x rmvd) to Thos Jefferson.
I refuse to believe that. NO WAY he is dead.
I'm in for coffee if I survive the co. holiday prty
I would be ticked if I got a car that I paid for without even getting to pick out the color.
And some people actually like Romney too and are at his rallies, chanting YES YES YES!
Sen Kirsten Gillibrand (D-NY) discussing women & the economy v Rep Michele Bachmann (R-MN) on Meet the Press with David Gregory tomorrow.
Smooth all day and all night, too! Half price bottles of vino from open to close, and the Eric Jacobson Quartet at 7:30.
Love this song. Remember it @ Disco!
party in the f of x....
What if the people in the picture change for the better? I just blew your mind.
Jump on our carousel. Your great book deserves a good ride.
Vacations make me horny.
Aaaay I Gotta Rap To You Tomorrow About Grad Night
Livestock is $35 billion industry in
Movie night tonight!
No doubt physicists "observe" tracks on computer screens, but what made those tracks? Particle collision physics of what? Ships passing by..
apparently God knows is going to bust up Pacquiao and is asking him to retire instead of facing him
"sometimes people say my head is too big for my body and I say compared to what"
Shavuoth is next week. If you haven't submitted your 2012 March of the Living application you're late. www.caje-miami.org/mol
what up fam!
Having a gr8 papa day. Hope all dads are enjoying their day as well.
Library will be Closed this Sunday for Network Upgrades. We'll see you on Monday! #SorryHuskies!
"CHANGE always comes bearing GIFTS." ~Price Pritchett... You may have to look past some of the wrapping, but, RECEIVE with arms wide OPEN...
We're out of nutella AND orange juice....I don't know how to function
Yes!!! Please rain all day!!!!
RT To be generous of spirit is to place your trust in the flow of abundance.
Those air Max came out like February been #copped get yo shoe came up hoe
we are having the same issue! Trying to figure it out!
Listening to these people at the homeless shelter gossip about the others while they're asleep. Whadda Friday night!
You this read wrong. :)
I love British people!
If i die before i wake, i pray the lord my soul to take
meeting . Seems awesome! Super thoughtful. Franklyn & Marshall must have vision.
No kidding! Expect some rage tweeting soon. I don't do well when I'm operating in an environment I'm unfamiliar with. :)
Watching the Kim Kardashian wedding special made me physically ill.
Not a mess. Just crazy AF.
“: I wish I had time to get a cupcake from or Ugh!!!”
Time may change me but I can't trace time....
Congrats to on being called up from A today !!
Brewer time!
you have to download it (: it's an app for an itouch or iphone
HAHAHAHAHHAHAHAHA. im dying
doesn't it?!! I just don't feel like going to the store. lol
if you're gonna be a bear, be a grizzly
Forget your password? We have you covered. At sign in, just enter your password and loosing your password or account is a thing of the past.
Yes, I do a lot of commercials. I think the age group is fine. Early 30s for commercials, generally mid-late 20s for film/tv.
Britt! I'm going Sunday with my friends if you wanna come with! (:
The is anyone up twitter makes me weep for the human race
Thank you for adding me. Always a pleasure speaking with you.
The Chipmunks The Movie Soundtrack
all in favor of "Just Friends" booty shorts for Lou and Harry?
Can you say furniture, telephones, collectors items etc available for bidding. We are ready to AUCTION tonight!
the worst part about living in Texas is the big 12 or whatever the hell they call it now
thanks for the s/o
me too. Somke is gonna get this!
Napping c:
Holy fucking nosebleed I NEED THIS GAME NOW!!!
thanks for the RT on the Pinterest post. Have you checked out Juxtapost?
i be the life of the party <3 cant wait till my bigg 18
good, I better be scoring goals like your hitting homeruns!! :) I'm so proud of you!! :)
guess I'm making a trip to VT for stickers.
Tickets are in for the March 10th show, who needs em? $10 for 21+
is this pool party something normal people can go to or just you VIP beautiful people? Also... is there a cover?
wheres that girl version of me at
I don't understand them anyday..and the LibertyUniversity speech should come with maalox....lordy...
it's still sending my phone trippin
Just had a great chat with about reading youth lit.
are the elevators not working again? They worked an hour ago.
Hey lovely!! Happy New Year to you! It's a New Year & that means COCKTAILS! No rush on the editing. Hope you're well too! xo
The policy of being too cautious is the greatest risk of all.
So inspired by at the AdClub CMO breakfast this morning!
Be sure to Vote NO in the referendum to stop the #WisconsinUnion from putting a #GlassBox on the Terrace.
When I Talk To A Girl, Idc About Any Other Dude Trying To Talk To Her, Cause I Know Where I Stand .
i know so many people that go to the same school as you! dont think your off the hook for what you did to me!hunny this is just the begging
Craving hard now.
Muahahahaha almost to cruces. Kevin awaits.
Are u kiddin me! they have a website where u can buy followers...lol isn't that like trying to buy popularity or buying acceptability?
Thank you!
JB when you go in the Italy??
so pumped for tonight at w/ "rockin' with our city like a sold-out show."
Selena Gomez confirmed she'll be working on her fourth studio album later on this year. 'It will be the best one yet."
You just need to write that single “Pour Some Sugar Meat On Me” and the Troub will be blowin’ your phone up.
eating baguette sandwich. feeling like I'm in Oxford. Abilene wind knocks it out of my hand. reality check.
I've been watching talking heads on teevee, determining who is an alternating esotrope or an exotrope. Total nerd, I know ...
#dcmi10 Mike Bergman: Linked Data: preferred technique for those who know what they're doing
Steve Jobs affected me in many positive ways. Too many good things to list in only 140 characters! :)
shoot, I had my fingers, toes, arms and legs all crossed that I'd win! :)
Going to the concert this June for my bestie's birthday. I can't wait!
oh my gosh. I love Key of Awesome. :D
send us a postcard, we are shipping out the "opportunity kits" mid may. Fit Kits for long and short sleeve being stitched right now.
My pleasure! Looking forward to the soil project.
Congrats to for getting drafted today!
#RIPMCA We can all agree that this is like one of the Beatles passing on right? Un-Fucking-Follow if you disagree.
surprising that they made it that far.we'll win it next year hopefully
wiggle wiggle wiggle!!!!
a friend said he would stop by his son's school on the way home after partying & pick up trash so students will see clean environ
I hope I win lol... I won't though :/
RT :Its not the load that breaks you down its the way you carry it. Capacity is only built when you take on more to become more
yeah. The show's rigged.
thanks love! If you could also tweet a link to the giveaway video, that would help a lot!! :D
RT if you are ready for summer! :) x
Kevorkian is the one that helps you kill yourself, and Kardashian is the one that makes you want to, right?
GOOD MORNING BEAUTIFUL (now can you tell all the stupid people to shut up??)
"bitch it's blow job thirty" great...thanks baby
My party
hopefully your site doesn't crash tomorrow!
I sold 1 of the wrestling games. I can give u the other one for $12
Watching Idol....hmm thos should've ended after Jessica Sanchez
Booboo, you gon' regret this tomorrow. i got you in 1st.
who wanted children, or miscarried or had abortions ... There are mothers who don't know where their children are. There are children ...
You are your own best ally and your instincts are your best tools.
you make my day... Everyday. So hilarious
Oh really dtrix you've never seen such great moves from such young kids... I'm sorry do we not recall ABDC6 and the ICONic Boyz or?
Child-rearing "expert" Bristol Palin says kids do better w/ a mom & dad; More proof hypocritical nut doesn't fall far from the tree.
Your welcome. Aha yes french fry it shall be lol or munchies since he always get lmao
April 2012 Special – Buy 1 Belladerma Beauty Benefits membership, get a second one Free – Perfect Graduation or Mother's Day gift!
Had great first Emperor Concerto rehearsal with today and conductor Concert at #Murphy Saturday night!
You'll soon be able to fly non-stop from PDX to Reagan National in D-C. fills us in on at 6:30pm.
Dear 2nd Amendment fetishists: Today is a proud day for you, no doubt. Using a gun to make a political statement is so effective. Idiots.
Secretary Wilkins - you are a dedicated leader! Thank you!
Planking is so 2011.
your my butterfly sugar baby... Sry had to do it
Of course, there is no mention of the lack of job opportunities for poor #Julia because of U.S. having the world's highest corporate taxes
Yes! D: Just to experience and see the wonderful performers play. The 99' Woodstock was nothing like the 69'.
miss youu too!
Whats for Lunch?
Enjoy, those things are hard to get!
Once again sorry": Oh k. Noprob RT : Sorry I'm fault send :D : what?"
I kept seeing the ads in comics and saw a trailer. Thought Tracy would like it.
Watching South Park with Viggle Tue | 12:01AM | Comedy Central Get real rewards just for watching TV.
Eminem? Who wants to see living people after that Tupac shit? Cameos from dead people is the hot shit now.
anytime u fix the biggest ass dinner and everyone decide oh we change our mind lol i say this fuck fam
looking forward to meeting you on the 30th. ATX
4 hours of #Church on CNN & Fox today, Remembering #Whitney We all struggle at times to receive God's grace, some more public than others.
ME BE Helper in your group
Watching We Bought A Zoo :)
Thanksgiving Day Race tomorrow
There is nothing wrong with love its a natural feeling of positive emotion
The BEST thing about Jesus-Burger is that I'll totally be able to get to be the spokesperson because he'll be needing a job!
wanna get paid they say crime pays
Where is the Voter ID I'm a 100% Mail-In Ballot? Your mailing address? Your siniture? The Felony warning for falsifying? WTH!
I hate this
Lmao!! RT : Oh, you want a dude that makes over 100k and is over 6'3 ?! Well, people in hell want ice water..
please follow me? Your amazing!
..hey you
super jealous ur goin to the game by the way...totally not fair
We Found Love is crazy and i love it ! Do you love it ,to ?
Says the violence has touched every district in this city.
Thanks, I thought it was pretty funny when I heard it too. Planning on using it myself.
everything begins with a thought.... cultivate them... write them down.... make a list... and DO..... NO LIMITS
I guess the normal mega millions jackpot isn't enough!
#InstantTurnOn if she rolls up widout even askn u :)
Getting closer to announcing the itinerary for the Irish Ancestry Group Tour.
Me neither. american idol is kind of horrible compared to the other ones. xD
Derby State of mind
What is your favorite holiday tradition?
And the Winterhawks season in ovah
what's good?
When you need juice, you need juice! Thank for being a loyal AmazonFresh customer.
did I make u giggle? ;)
Well today started off good then got worse, but aye it is what it is! Gonna have to start making this better for Shaquon
Watching a show on broadcast tv - ug. what is this, 1995? What do you mean there's no fast forward?
Watch for bad apples: slackers, jerks and pessimists
I'm feeling pretty good. Hvn a lazy Sunday, which is always nice.
The only thing gettin me out of bed this morning is the fact that I'm graduating next month.
VINNY since Ur on can u plz follow me u inspire my lil 4year old sister and my 6year old bro he started dancing at 5 plz :)
We promise it's tasty ;)
Welcome to Twitter! I checked out your photography site, and it looks really good. Hope everything's going great!
it was a good game except the foul ratio at the end. So it's whatever they won and fought hard so it's not a big deal.
: I thought I was the only one feeling like that!
Thanks for all the new adds, you have been added as well. Hope everyone had a great day today. Time for some reading, and then bed.
We tried, indeed we did!
"At least I don't live with my parents."
Signing an offer letter.
I'm speechless. I'm glad no innocent bystanders were hurt.
- I love this idea. Sometimes the "old" books are forgotten.
THEN I'll listen to all of the songs and it will be amazing. ❤🎶
hey! Can you let your listeners know we have 100s of new gowns at the Cheltenham Mall in Philly! Thanks for the support!
$50,000 + in lawyer fees........he's guilty and no charges have even been filed yet.
#GreatestFilms Annie Hall, Memento, Citizen Kane, To Kill A Mockingbird, The Godfather, Vertigo. 2001: A Space Odyssey, Some Like It Hot
not playing but he will be there with another hopeful transfer an O. L. who started at md. obrian still in school dude.
ATTENTION WHITE PEOPLE: Rangers Capitals are going to double OT.
Ticketmaster allows you to purchase ticket insurance for $7.
Where is the best place to ride a Jetski in New Jersey?
Love me some Le'Andria and Fantasia!! My God! My God
yeah this is fucked for any franco. it interprets the numbers as numbers :/
your welcome :)
Are you sleeping?" "No... I always get into bed every night and just pretend I'm dead...
the movie??
so is Applebee's, but not nearly as enjoyable.
I'm giving you my heart, just love me in return is all I ask.
You would hate on Flight of the Conchords, you inbred fuck. Can't wait to see you!
A lion does not concern himself with the opinions of a sheep.
Check out our free home safety video targeted toward Moms and their family: www.safemoms.org
Damn whats for breakfast?!
This week's featured vendor is our Homebrew Supply Sponsor, ! RT if you're ready to try their brew!
. Thank you for allowing me to share with the tribe!
Turns out I am pretty awesome with a teleprompter!
Thank you! RT : How awesome. I am definitely inspired. Keep up the good work, y'all!
In my wicked bizarre head, fellow Austinite is my best friend and we drink martinis all day & shame everyone that walks by.
Cant wait for the Show!!!! Hope you are working on a sign or T-shirt to win that guitar!!!
it's perfect! :)
K. Medicine time.
The new album passed the girlfriend test... I am relieved.
has your product ever worked on a Porsche 996?
I love that show, too! I watch it every week with my gram.
YES oh well giant eagle is more dependable
good Easter, ate alot and saw family
Thank you! :)
Very true;) RT : Of course. Wouldn't be Miami without a DJ
obvi none silly!!!!!
It's a damn shame what they did to that dog. RT : Yo rents due mutha fucka!! And don't try that fallin down the stairs shit!!
“: Fuck Off Ma TL Wit All Dis Basketball Talk!” Go To Bed Then
not even @ work yet & already I'm ready to go home
I'm gonna shave off the soul patch! Good news is it can always grow back in a couple of days! :)
all i do is write and record. haha.
they ask me all the time why do black men smoke weed it's the only thing that keeps us sane
Manuel Herrera and Jessica Phillips. Do I win?
The top mobile app operating systems are Android and iOS
hahah oh wow!
tickets to: Spiderman - Turn off the Lights, Fly over the audience, Crash into the Wall - better wear a hard-hat
When did it become acceptable to start making threats via twitter?
would've loved to hear that! Awesome.
Always ready for a #WW ;-)
ugh, twitter is gonna get shot
It is 60 social workers and nurses in this training and only 6 are males.....
I know that it is "closed to the public", but wasn't sure if there were ever special opportunities.
Redesigning your office? A legal-themed chess set would be perfect!!!
Well, I guess since it IS your birthday... *sigh* RT : You going to be the DD tomorrow for my birthday??!? Please? <3
Boy has pburg changed
They better not be done with trades...either that or K-Rod will look funny playing SS
I have been neglecting you, Twitter. You can thank for getting me back into it.
Yeesssssssss!!! knows you're an awesome person to win!
follow me to learn more about the special growth products I have called Complete Length
Giants to the Super Bowl? Will be a great weekend event. Can't wait.
Birthday lunch !! Why? 'cuz it's the best lunch place in town!!
Just started one of my readers with Dragonsong!! Can't tell you how many hours of my life spent on Pern.
“: The Spurs are not calmly beating down the Clippers anymore....they are now beating them down with blunt force lol. #NBA.”
V100 All-Request Cafe at Noon today. Listen to win a nice prize from the Purple Onion or WV Marketplace today!
McDonald's when your drunk is like getting a car on Christmas
Jump starting my personal marketing! Email is so easy...but so passive.
I just said this! Can't complain, though. I'm the only one of the crew who doesn't have to go work in the AM.
Oh...my... It's a good thing the ladies like the double As? ;)
upper respiratory infection here. Went to work for a bit and the dr other than that stuck at home.
Love the fact that is feeling the same way I'm feeling...but I'm the one that did the crying :'-)
at school alone cause i cant find :'(
Thanks for organizing the #ArabTech event & special Thanks to the panelists
No cuts in town? Wtf.....
my favorite person in that show is currently Da. But favorite song is, still is, Lies
school today. only two more classes after this and then im done with the semester!
Sponsorship of Manchester City Football Club will move from Umbro to Nike at the start of the 2013/2014 season.
welcome to Twitter
what the heck does that mean?!
I really dnt knw.. I hope so.
Graduating with a bachelors in criminal justice and just added a #minor in sociology.. Alright alright
thought it would go anywhere.
God I hate the wind! All my cats stuff has been blown to Oz. My house is freezing. Blargh. I'm huddling under the covers.
With all the spider grub outside in yard, why did it squeeze in between screen & window?
Not. Feeling. It.
Ahh a beautifull day for disc golf
AYE Follow Me Please i Did What You Wanted
What a game
Ha, I know. I'm doing a twitlonger about my life as an Arianator :D ♥ ♥Bretana♥
Line from a hs writer w/ : I dream that I can do a kick-flip over seven steps #theworldneeds more
Maybe I was writing a damn #basketballpoem? Now I'm writing a damn
oh crap - a lucie / 'rena semi? Sigh. Lucie may backslide to 3rd grade. Sigh.
Somebody crack a winder in this trailer bathroom I'm about to die!!
Sometimes you have to tell yourself, "I am the best"
ouch. How are your seat neighbors??
The only time I procrastinate is when I have a writing deadline looming... But once I start writing I could go on for days and days...
YES ME TOO!
if its anything like the last time I was gone this long, I'll have furry magnets for a few days
is my favorite golfer coming to #CLASSIC this year? Would love to see you!
Hyped up <3 Powers of Accomplishment IGNITED!! Livin the Attitude~ ;)
Off to check out rings, and then to have Thai food with friends.
Watch this thing on Forgiveness is giving up the hope that the pass could be different"
Jenga&Juice this thursday happy hour at MOE BAR. 5pm. its gonna be raining so get your ass to the bar!
Now that is what I am talking about....You are classic...and a Hawks fan..can you get any better ; )
RT that's the way to go! : Watching classic CM Punk matches. No better way to spend a Sunday.
Same thing happened on my fridg, didn't start a fire though, just wouldn't keep cold. Over $400 to change out a $20 switch.
Love it when does a story on rap.
okay, whatever,, and why do you think i care if its about will or not.
“: If only a machine could combine all four republican candidates together then one giant man could lose to Obama.”
Wow Gunners are falling apart
Hard to complain about great wine, great people & 80's music. Thanks !
what's wrong
It's about time to
2 Ariana I Love U!Tweet Me!I <3 Ur Song Put Ur Hearts Up!U/Me Have Same Tweets I Have 19.5K U Have 19.4K Tweets
o wow lol it's ok
We can all be relieved that POTUS won't be the shunned outcast in the corner at George Clooney's party tomorrow night.
Attn: RT : I think raisins go with just about anything.
fuck haters…just putting it out there
because men work 100% more.
I just couldn't Kat. I turned it off at the beginning. It was giving me a headache.
Thank you! (:
Been writing a couple of articles as I get the chance to. Will be done w/ them soon & will post. Need to add to & edit them a bit. Later!
I can NOT wait to meet my fellow Guidette in Staten Island!! HeeHee! Xo
dear GRRM, 1995 called and would like its web design back
TRAFFIC ALERT: Head on crash with injuries at Hwy. 51 and Gray in the Town of Windsor. SB 51 closed at Vinburn. Use alternate route.
So what you're saying is they are very much like grown men?
Hell yeah. when is school over for you?
kiss my ass
nope! i have no idea what it is about. i guess i live under a rock??
I know. I just thought it was odd xD
HAPPY MOTHER'S DAY to all da mothers out there from UPC! Enjoy ya'll day!!
The successful man will profit from his mistakes and try again in a different way. -Dale Carnegie
is he packing?
oh hey, you lil baby tweeter
"The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of this problem."
also to the lady who wanted a longer set: we've got one more song up our sleeves so it will happen.
“: It's still #LakerNation fuck OKC I been there the women are ugly so they could never be winners goodnight!!!”
you moving here? If so, when? I'll be back at CUNY in the end.
Go Eagles!
Thoughts and prayers to Keifer & Shawna of Shawna's dad "Mickey" McIlwain has passed away.
I gotta wake up too a blowjob every morning
I miss my fav sister
Haha its okay I didn't know if it was you until I looked a second time I forgot you died your hair
Thanks for stopping in @ Diamonds & Pearls Couture (Buckhead)
Lawd I'm trying my best to let this couch go but.....
Ok I see ya puttin my life on blast mode on twitter lol
aww that's so cute
Absolutely! Thanks for a sunny greeting and have a great day!
And I mean "believes" her in the sense that he may not have challenged inconsistencies with the evidence KNOWN to exist.
Well whaddya' know---another sale just made my How To Pitch class! Plus, we're building some serious horizontal loyalty.
DealShow is live right now! Go check it out: www.dealshow.com
Y do everyone keep tellin me to whoop my kids???
ridiculous and hilarious! If only they just played their first album and nothing else, this wouldn't have happened.
happy birthday :)))
Put all this together -- and you get the sounds of
Are you hot and sweaty?
And congrats back, We're crossing out fingers for 6!
hey!! it's beeh a while...how have you been?
I can promise it's organic, but I'm not sure about fat free.
your movie is amazing!! <3<3
NOT ALWAYS THERE WEN U CALL BUT I'M ALWAYS I ONTIME. ASHANTI.
he is dreamier
I'm in high school, I think I'm to old for u
Finna lay down & take a nap before heading to Nebraska
I am not going to believe that Junior Seau is dead until national news outlets report it. Haven't seen anything official yet.
I always feel bad when I have to vote for my fellow faculty members to be on committees...
Max, from Orlando-FL God bless you. You have been such a great inspiration for my spiritual life. Hope one day meet you in person
Sun burn on yer back were you cant lay down without hurting <<<<<<
Reggie Evans deserves a bonus man. This freakin guy has been key.
thanks a million man!
I hate that I sleep all day and then get really hungry at night when there's nothing to eat. I just want some jamaican food!
your cut off
That's great that you had such an awesome orgasm, but if you really want to thank me, tell as many people as possible about this. Thanks!
If its made in north carolina, dont buy it!!! Gays have money...lets not send it their way fuck those homo hating dickholes
hey hey! Haven't seen you in forever!
I feel like I'm really being allowed to connect with the characters by watching every mundane, pointless task they have to do.
..The heart already knows What the mind can only dream of. Trust your heart :)
Lik eBush never took a vacation hu?? like 3 years worth of vacation time...when did bush ever lead??
Congrats!! : woot woot! See us at Milwaukee on May 10th at the Harley Museum!
good well I bled orange and black. Getting the old school logo as my first tattoo for my 30th. Keep rockin my dude
How sexy of an upset pick is uconn over Syracuse? I feel like everyone will be calling this one
finally all this brett favre garbage can be put to rest. he is done, now hang em up. we r all sick of your act
Let's play a game called "You know you've got a roommate when..." You NEVER cook, but you're ALWAYS emptying the dishwasher.
Good Luck......remember black men and drugs just don"t go together> haha
Apparently estival & hibernal. Who knew!?
where are you? I'm at a public hearing in Chula Vista?
Me and my moms texts messages <3
happy birthday !(:
LMFAO I love you too babe
#100grand buys a lot of Jetski's ...Wake A Deal Wednesday!
All of our tacos for just $1 each? Yes! Use cardcase to pay! Get the app!
Happy, happy birthday, Trisha!! Hope your day is stinkin' amazing!
Behind every beautiful girl, there is a stupid guy who did her wrong and made her strong
I have five meetings today. Three of them are pre-meeting meetings. Ugh...
We go beat'em by 50!! #HEAT HATERS! #
i officially give up on trying to get your attention its ACTUALLY IMPOSSIBLE
nd I can't STOP thanking u enough 4 lifting me up nd takin time out ur day 2 do so. I appreciate dat A LOT!
Congrats on all of Future Legends success. You guys are doing big things!
Nothing like football and party platters to bring friends together. :)
nm just so bored rite now
I am a Foodie at heart with a focus on #healthyeating. #Savor looks like a can't miss event.
it's not me.
what you doin
Thank you for your RT. We had a blast today with Miss Susan in
At work bored and my eyes hurt really bad. Im not having a good time right now
Welcome David! Thanks for your support! :)
I'm not going to let anyone control my moods anymore...they're not worth it
Happy birthday to my sweet bud
Gays up for execution in Iran? Horrifying. Islamophobic fear-mongering via anti-Sharia Bill in KS? Also bad. Both based in fear of the other
After the #Easter Parade on 5th Ave today, come in and see our exhibition, "It's the Political Economy, Stupid" FREE 10AM - 6PM!
Crazy morning of racing at Great finish
Obstacles are the things we see when we take our eyes off our goals. -Zig Ziglar
happy b-day
Just hired an Account Executive for my company. Growing like crazy!
You should always stop by RT Every time I pass the Southport stop, my brain goes "" and mostly every time I resist
preform in Minnesota on my birthday(:
Tonight's fiddler on the roof show at the anchorages performing arts Center was fantastic.
The Budget Van Lines/Grand Moving, Inc. experience so far has been just short of "call 911" quality.
I honestly can't wait for Miley's episode tonight!
Good morning, all! Happy Wednesday!
Bobby is dead, killed the Leviathan.
Strong winds working against firefighters' containment efforts.
Ideas are boiling. Looks like its time to add the main course!!
For real!! its been a grip! lets kick this week
I like running too much. & I don't get tired quick.
Cool - would love to see your rendition of "Happiness" when you finish!
oh he likes it REAL crisp.  Ahahahahaha!
Voting for the More Uncovered album art is now over. We will let you know the winning cover tomorrow!
For #appfriday, I'm giving away 5 promo codes for Builda the Re-Bicycler for iPad. First 5 to get @ me get codes. Have it? Tell a friend!
getting ready for commercial audition tomorrow
Water. Yeah.
The Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act would obliterate any semblance of online privacy in the United States.
Omg! Me too! I woke up and was like damn, performin 2day! I acted like he was dwn here or sumthin lol
How is my Academic Profile for College?
Thanks for featuring in the Monthly Noodler! Always happy to whip Noodlers into shape!
At bedtime tonight, there shall be a wild rumpus.
Upshaw: "The wait was a little frustrating at times, but I'm very excited and happy to be chosen in the second round as a Baltimore Raven."
Why? It was meant to be humorous... :)
Landed 2 -4 more tee designs yesterday. Im seeing a trend www.steveknerem.com
Galveston is in the eye of the storm. All is calm - right now. Don't venture outside - the back of eyewall coming in next hour or so.
Bout to spark this bowl up
just wope my son in basketball , he think he got g lol like his auntie b reed
Jamie Alimorad's EP Cornerstone reviewed in the The Noise mag #308 avail throughout Boston & Newbury Comics. Pick up your copy today!
This is the worst feeling ever! /;
Thanks -- am on an email thread discussing XML annotation and someone suggested NLM. First I'd seen it; wondered why not TEI?
A team of highly trained specialists and more hair product than is good for girl.
97X... BAM. The future of rock and roll.
Nashville criminal lawyer blog post . Judge grants gag order in MTSU murder case . ://bit.ly/wo0mJWhttp
ah. Ok. I'll have to look into that
We'll be sharing Guru Guide 3rd edition preview highlights at ILTA INSIGHT next week. Come by stand 35 to find out more.
JUST SAW FIRST FIREFLY OF THE YEAR!!! THERE WERE LIKE 937;729/9/7/ IN A FIELD, THE FIELD WAS BLINGIN'!!!! #I'mFiveRightNow
not much and can u go on touch
Charles Duhigg up now on the Power of Habit
DID YOU ASK ABOUT NEXT WEEK AND DID THE MONEY GO THROUGH OR NOT?!
#Life would be intolerable without #music. And, if i lose my hearing, I will sleep on a speaker and turn up the bass.
Haha, yes. RT : Managing the accounts is not the hard part; it's waiting on answers from other staff.
Don't forget - next drawing for a free race entry will be Sunday, Nov 20th! We hope you'll sign up for a chance to win!
working and trying the whole relationship thing again
I know! This is a fast one. I think mostly because I waited 4 months to tell everyone, lol. ;o)
Am i rude??? Alot ppl say i am
I fear my lifelong goal to be a graphic designer will soon be thwarted by Drawsomething posting all of my recent pieces on Google, forever.
Massage, jacuzzi bubble bath, and wine by the fire. What more could a girl want?
There is news about the "Old Spice Guy" at theentertainmentbucket.com
Everyone Has Been Hacked. Now What? - The attackers chose their moment well. (Kim Zetter/Wired) #m$watch
Librarians need to admit that a LOT of things suck
Just announced! San Francisco musical theatre favorite singer/actor John Cavellini teams up with Tom Shaw Trio at 7pm on 2/25 at Martuni's!
Hearing Protection - Harris Bipod
On my way to the airport O___o the countdown is officially ova
your music video is playing at my mall food court right now...
Lol!!! This old guy at the airport is trying SO hard with his lady on the phone! Lol!!!
Check out tweets.
already have!:)
Hi. How are you doing? What's new? Please hit me back. I may be busy. But I will get with you
Sure thing. We had a good time talking to your class and it was nice to meet you ... I think you asked the most ?s :)
Yo I'm Serious I'm Following The Next 10. As Long As U Ain't That Porno Shit.... Let's Be Real Bro..
Haha okay junior year my locker is gonna be just blown up with one direction shit
Should not have made that move :/
It's go time
Great win for
Neal Nisky and Sully all out. Not good at all. Pens need to dig deep here and maintain their foothold on the 4th seed.
About to hit the road. Playing in Temple, Texas today with and many more!
Cutting investments to kids to "help them w/ debt" is like cutting your nose to spite your face.
Really enjoying without the Joe. is doing a great job, and his guests actually get to speak.
Tried new sushi place for first time with We both really liked Arirang in Bay Ridge and recommend it.
“NarcissTwit” = Someone who absurdly believes all of your tweets are expressly about them.
lmao yeah, I was so #Unwanted, now I get an "I miss you/I love you" text like every other day...wtf is this about lmao
I miss my best friend !! Only 79 DAYS!! :)
My sister is like so annoying
Please join us at 4:30 today when carolers from Park Street School (grades K-6) serenade us with Christmas music. Punch will be served!
Fitness goal deadline is exactly 16 weeks from now. It's like a 112 day adventure.
Especially: that one chick who says you her baby daddy. Lol
meeting at a taking back sunday concert!! In other words meeting your idol totally unexpectedly!
It would be fun!!! Let me know if you need more info!
3 weeks of a lifetime is nothing but it changes your life!
COULD ANYTHING POSSIBLY BE BETTER THAN AN EMPTY NEST/GOLDEN GIRLS CROSSOVER EPISODE?
BRB twitter don't forget to follow me on #Instagram Angelitofrmdabx #Ifollowback and *like pix!!
I hate the Knicks. Wearing my 9's because I want the to sweep
Wow...I just read the story about the fire. You are one in a million! May God bless you! Wish you were the mayor of Detroit :-)
smoking hookah in my back yard all by my fucking lonesome );
Who knew radio Disney actually played current not so kidish songs...thanks Jessie for putting me in a car that ONLY plays am lol
Oh but in case I stand a little chance/ here comes the jackpot question in advance/ what are you doing new years/ new years eve?
Dr. Kreeft is playing himself at chess at the table next to me. Half of his mind is doing what no one else here could
Bed. CCD at 9 AM because where gonna walk around revere? 😖Lmao idk but night. 😚💤
Mid-Afternoon doldrums.
I'm gonna. see you again tomorrow(: <3
is this the right decision? Hope so :/
No marriage
TERRIFYING AND AWESOME.
Yes Kobe Kobe Kobe
I think it's time for that perm, Ross.
Tyler Black pins Necro Butcher after rolling through on a cross body block attempt.
We tried this in Detroit, all the cops moved to an area on the edge of the city. It didn't really help
Spotify, Lion, and Harry Potter oh my!
I swear my phone never gets charged properly.
forever wearing not matching socks from costco
Hi folks. Hope to see you out tonight at Jovita's. Lucky Tomblin Band at 8pm and The VBB at 10pm.
Like Dwayne Wade just said after the win "This is my House" ... Lets Go Miami Heat !!!!!
he just text me saying "I need a hug ;(." I wanna asnwer :(
Welcome to Fabulous Las Vegas Nevada for the Break That Single show playing the very best of indie music. 11am-1pm PST w/y host DJNateski
Tears are how our heart speaks when our lips cannot describe how much we’ve been hurt.
thank u Jesus...
Pink salts arrived! Tomorrow we'll buy the beef for corning.
*sobs* Why? Why?!! What episode is this?
“: Taken is by far the best movie ever”
Just saw two different kids attached to their parents by a leash in the PHX airport. I thought kid leashes were a joke?
NDC getting those Rogue Green KD's?
What do you do in the medical field? And you will love Zumba, been teaching for over 3 years, met Beto a few times!
Sometimes you don't realize you care for someone, until they stop caring for you.
Maxine Waters called it right...the new GOP are demons.
Dear Penny Saver, Stop wasting trees on me. You're just taking up space in my mailbox.
hi Sharon, sent you a reply to your tweet re: #autism via e-mail. Thank you!
I'm such a loser. I'm working right now, when there are hundreds of bars and friends in a 10-block radius. Just not interested though.
good luck in your racquetball match. let us know how you played and if you need any help or advice.
Watching channeling on the F1 grid. Not sure who bounces more.
My former boss in Philly, gd friend, blocker for JimBrown & FritzPollard chairman John Wooden used to say," Sleeping is Overrated".
So sessions hit a three and nothing from ya..iight
I miss the old days when I didn't have to worry about growing up!
and just cooked a delicious dinner yum!
Love the finger puppet cubs :)
Cool so this is Twitter
MT : On CapHill, I reiterated that Rep Ryan's budget draws on flawed theory & balances budget on the backs of America's students.
Lemon Grove Councilmember Mary England signed my Central Comm re-election papers. If ur in the new 79th Assembly District I need ur sig too!
Time for some yoga with ! Namaste
Haha no lie RT : My lil sister trynna follow me on instagram.... I love her but that's heat
Sunny in Seattle and its Friday!! This is real nice.
All day art kinda' day. Teenagers fixing meal now so I can get some work done (wonder who'll clean up kitchen after?). omg
January 3, 1973 - A group led by Mr. George Steinbrenner I buys the Yankees from CBS.
It has been resolved: we intend to cease posting from the group twitter account. Commencing final posts.
The heat are on fire thoooo !
is the best.
This sucks
hate you queen ._. ❤
#IAlwaysWonderIf you smile when you see a text from me, the same way I smile when I see one from you
Most actors learn to cry on cue. I had to fart on cue in a movie once, & they all cried. I'm rather proud of that actually. True story.
Sometimes I realize sitting home alone screaming along to AVPM/S songs is kinda weird, then I get over it.
These airplanes are too loud tho
is Paper an app? Can you send a link? It's very cool!
RT : 96 year anniversary of the Easter Rising. Yeats: "Not night, but death./Was it needless death after all?" (Easter, 1916)
Vick to the rescue!! YES!
im not feeling lucky.
Elsewhere, iPhone is not tied 2 AT&T. T-Mobile (incumbent) in Germany, O2 in UK, etc.
#fridayreads finished Tomorrow River by Kagen -great story & started The Wilding by Percy #fridaylistens finished Passage by Cronin - wow
Shindig will be going down for a bit while we unwrap some new toys. See you soon!
I've decided.. There are no words. Good night world. Tomorrow can't come soon enough..
The awkward moment when you wave at a complete stranger, thinking they are someone else.
. But of course :) I'll just have to wake up a bit earlier
Team USA still holds the Lead at the President's Cup, hope they can bring it home...
Great performance so far tonight. Thanks for joining me !
Client: "How does it feel to always be so happy?" Me: "Great! What's the alternative?" U can't control everything but can control ur mood.
I'm tired of getting my hopes up for things that I know will never happen.
i just realized i had 666 tweets... but not any more because i just tweeted this
Gotta give it to Ryan Hollins he is playing hard...but he's fallen down the past four trips down the floor
haha Nice!!:D
I can have a sleepover tonight
I find it very telling that today's Georgetown, TX Groupon is for a pistol class. Seriously?
whats good new followers, dam its been one hell of a week drama filled but fun. Get money
Awful, but I burst out laughing anyway.
Isn&#39;t Good Boy Floyd Mayweather Great for the game of boxing???
Soccer-cheering for a team you don't like because there is a team you like even less.
based wednesday, get your fucked up white vans on lets do this.
Yo y'all have no idea how much I've been playing Mercy!! Lol
Yeah...I'm an art widow until Dennis's show opens next month. And then I'm an ice fishing widow, & then a pond hockey widow.
Caution! Left brain world wants us to be like them & quit dreaming, To advance & prosper,steadfastly ignore that advice. Marilyn Grey
the only man listening is on another continent, proving my point! Haha
Happy birthday to our former cover guy Sidney Poitier. You are truly a legend!
If my 3.1 seconds in the sack lasted as long as 3.1 seconds at the end of a playoff basketball game I'd be a fucking stud.
really? Oh wow xD
“: you need any more corn hole boards ? I've got a set” Yep. Bring em. And bring Cory too
I dont know whats hotter u or the gun go check out THE EROTIC .com for a chance at 50k
I just don't feel like me tonight....
oops just saw this! My family lives out there & signed up and convinced me. Plus I like traveling for races to make them easier!
please add a seattle tour! #Bring1DtoSeattle 21
Sorry no free beats . But real affordable prices
you with us tonight?
uhh....guess they are engaged again. Love for life back on!
hunger games was the best movie I've ever seen in my life. Better than Harry potter <3
It's sad to say that if he simply used the phrase "boots on the border' more often, his approval ratings would jump 10 points.
Our thoughts go out to all those affected by this terrible disaster.
B.I.G. (Big In God) Springfest is Today!!!! hefner Lake(Star&Stripes Park)...gates open 4:30 event starts a 6p.m. COME HANG WITH US!!! F ...
also why is there Folgers in my cup as I wake?
At the gluten free expo in Chicago! Come see us!
For the day the Prez endorses it, well, you have to pull out the premium gifs.
I do, but I like acting better, more fun...
When are you coming back to or around Clay county or Bradford county!? I really would love to see you AGAIN! <33
good enough for me
#scms12 The inside and outside of software are not congruent
I really dont care if your pissed at me. Its not my problem.
getting fancy for #BJxmas4 and looking forward to some cocktail shrimps.
At the fancy mall.
The person next to me just left if someone is looking for a seat close to the front! I'm by the cameras
Yes I speak Italian, I work in photography around motor sports.
come home so we can go to the country club and drink Perrier and make fun of Danielle!
lol yeah finally
happy birthday!
"Wives may be merry, and yet honest too." -One of my favorite lines. From Shakespeare's Merry Wives of Windsor.
try it now
I'm sorry but the tacos got cold. Didn't realize you were coming late.
"work that ponytail! own that updo!"
NO MATTER WHAT YOU DID OR WHO YOU FUCKED.. I'D GO THROUGH HELL FOR YOU NO MATTER WHAT
No problem, glad you enjoyed the lunch! What did you order with LevelUp? ...The lobster bisque is awesome!
At least he doesn't look like Barney Fife, Pawlenty does!!
26 of 392 remaining after buy-in period...need to find some
3 cars filled with fresh baked goods! The more we get the more we give.
How are you a trail-blazer?
Uploading my work: new #PealeBCLM inventory lists for the 5x7 glass negative portion of the collection.
jus makin sure ya NUT!
I hate when ppl steal my side of the bed.
Is neighborhood updating broken? Mine hasn't updated in at least a week.
Thanks. Just wondering if it would have made a difference and saved costs .Eagle is turning in to a very expensive fire.
Tweet, Tweet, Tweet. Promoting is a good thing. What's the scoop with your movie?
Rut roh - that can't be good. Wonder if you sent it while I was traveling? 4/17-4/25. I'll look in hubs mail pile.
aww thanks! I had a great time!
it feels so nice to hear your voice
"I don't wanna do it with Owchu" well then don't do it with her.
love this! RT: "A hangover suggests a great night, jet lag suggests a great adventure!" ~jda - Get out and eXplore! TTOT :)
Haven't been on in awhile... miss my peeps! Lots of ideas floating around in my mind...
went through my house yesterday and did that. It is fun.
HAPPY VALENTINES DAY to Mi Fiance and shout out
Is very sad upset angry with herself and another. Crying jags are such fun...
ha ha love that place. Kiss is right around the corner on Columbus. Used to go there all the time
First visit to Matt Court.
One could say that GB is winning against Jean Quan's team. I couldn't resist that one. :)
We are still xfering old users over, if its easier for now make a new account and reupload your content! thanks
Thanks for the Listing!
i am really shocked #OKCTHUNDER hasn't capitalized on the beard by selling them a their arena for fans
Pool, beach or lake?
Henry Winkler ("The Fonz") and Cheyenne Jackson may be starring in a new comedy about the porn industry on Broadway this fall.
I do love it, but you've told that joke before.
Open House at TODAY noon-4; Milwaukee Animal Rescue Center is located inside Southridge Mall!
Yeah, we know $ is tight for all of us, hopefully this a quality NYE option that won't kill your wallet. Tunes will be good!
can u explain the arrow thingys lol
I believe in the infinite evil of AI because Swype has never correctly chosen for or four in a tweet.
omg. someone please record vinnys ustream? I can't watch it.
That sounds like a great teaser for a novel written in 1st person.
just joined that committee last week actually & looking forward to working with Natalie! :-)
I wish you'd reply to me. I love you so much. It's literally insane.
according to I'm an awesome tweeter
During public comment, deputy city attorney asks not to be furloughed ... points out cops and criminals aren't furloughed.
Will be reading books by (R Isleib) 10 new books!
#Imagine Justin buys a puppy u:aw, whos that for? J:my girlfriend u: oh, I bet she'll likee it j:I know she will! ;) he hands u it u: :)
Take that, HBO!
Nap time!
wishing U the Best at the Charleston tourney :)! ~ we luv #Tennis! & we luv our Vania :)!
Fighting hobos in the street
We are looking forward to having you here, Howard.
Someone send me some Girl Scout cookies. Thanks!
Think I finally just found the two majors I will decide between
So many people online....xD
im not phase bye how ur momma raised u
sat may 19th.
it's 25 but I celebrate from 20 to 25. Hehe! Ok'
wait you aren't married or pregnant? no.way.
Oh.. Mah..God, Becky, look at her butt.
I like talking on the phone better too.
Everything, is said for a reason right?
(2) have to go searching for an ATM, withdrawal large amounts, and then go and find somewhere to break your bill just to ride the
just saw a woman running on her toes. Her heels never touched the floor. You would have gone mental
- Love and connection. The only things that matter.
Working out Keeping up with my Sexiness Listen to Yall need to do the same www.whoistrillogy.com
Was your Dad upset when his 30 year old drumsticks broke?
Being sick sucks more than a 1$ prostitute
going great! Don't want it to end cuz I'm gonna have to #paythetaxman too.
Thanks! Sorry I guess we're getting food right now... We need to get over to your place ASAP! Ha
did you take albas shift?
staying under the radar for a bit.. Lol
I love food. dont know what i'd do without it.
well im dead then
The devil will do anything to get you off the wrong track I see it for what it is....
The secret is to be yourself. <3
shipping and asking if she shipped gaylor, her and garrett nickelsen
Loving that I had an opportunity to personally thank & toast (twice) Bruce Sagan for his outstanding support for the arts sector in
he'll get one inning then Bard
Who remembers those little red and yellow toddler cars that you had to Flinstone style drive?..
God won't plant fruit in a garden of weeds. Weeds will alway choke the fruit out. Get the weeds out of your ministry & out of ur life.
Overheard at lunch: "My kid was disappointed that he couldn't come with me to Radiohead because he's three."
& would make such a cute couple!!!
DAMN THIS FOLLOWING LIMIT!!!
I'm just saying u can do better... tell me have u heard that lately? -Drake
I'll be working at the Bay View and Whitefish Bay stores this week... fun days ahead!
Hey shit bags, we're playing in Pittsburgh at The Smiling Moose tonight (3/6)! Be sure to come down and get wild with us!
40404 place your christmas order platters for the office or next family event: cupcakes, cakes, cakepops and cookiees!!!
. total bulls-eye...really.
About to work out
is that tonight or tomorrow?
What would happen if dimensions crossed barriers? Metal lighted birds appeared to Lewis and Clark? Paved roads appear to sacajawea?
working hard, hardly working... Have a sazerac for me...
don't forget to follow me back!
I'm doing good. Busy with life guard training, about to start summer classes, just being busy. How are you, bebe?
((( Like FREE ?, Sell any item free,, www.just-plug-in.com )))
NEW STUFF AT HTTP://WWW.MOJOSWORLD.NET!!! Go check it out! New Pic of the Day, NEW LAY OUT!!!, New Music Video of the Day!!!
... Someday, perhaps ;)
Did you have a good Thanksgiving? Score any killer deals shopping?
Nice meeting you ! Thanks for following!
lol I'm so late on this, but yeah! ;) haha!
Jeez the Independent Film Festival of Boston has the most annoying site ever! Wondering if they actually want people to buy tickets or not..
one bite at a time
always! Too much sometimes.
If you have knowledge, let others light their candles in it.-- Margaret Fuller
would love to connect about your great events in the
Seeking # Jr .NET Dev with C#, .ASP, SQL # experience. Please contact
It was an infamous prosecution, grossly infamous. but not theless likely to succeed on that account
You're such and Inge hater!!! #Sarcasm When you are paid 5.5 million.. you are supposed to hit KC pitching.
- Unlike you, Obama's support of marriage equality was simply a campaign strategy to try and acquire the vote of the youth.
United in EPL. Houston Dynamo and Portland Timbers on this side of the Atlantic.
With charity there can be no conditions attached to it. Helping a friend and expecting the same in return is not charity (Crash Course)
Tired of you ...
Wow! The are puttin' a hurting on the #Kings even without Monta Ellis! The #Warriors look energized! Who are these guys?
makes 2 of us xD P.L.U.R.<3
Sometimes we are only giving a few minutes to be with the one we love and spend thousands of hours thinking about them.
don't get me wrong I hate UK with a passion. I just hate IU more lol. I saw uk play in person last weekend. It was crazy good
Pretty Little Liars<3
Taking a coffee break & going back in! Onward!
idk.u wanna go outskies and paint the town and by that i mean act like weirdos in a public place???
boo hoo sad story, new American fad story.
i just feel like bummin at the house in PJs (:
: mattress fundraiser? What ever happened to good old fashioned candy? WEIRD
I love food <3
Call Steve Bliss today at 858-278-2800 for your Free Consultation. San Diego Bankruptcy | Estate Planning Attorney | Credit Repair. We care.
Only counts if unattributed!
Feel free to tweet me as much as you want now, I'm not gonna reply because this argument was dead hours ago. Bye now.
People we can't grow with just #followback. Please retweet us and please ask your followers to follow us.Thanks. - Mature & Childish
Yep! 's made quite a huge leap in the past few years!
ah! That's almost as bad as Muncie not having chipotle or panda express :(
Chipotle has to have the longest lines in Madison
is at home, cleaning and unpacking.
that was gross
Butterflies just mean you are engaged in your activity and care about what you're doing. All is as it should be.
holy shit i'm in korea.
I just woke up from my nap imy & Chase
I have finally reached my breaking point! The air conditioner is on and I am loving it.
Gotta deal with a lot of trippy people when selling cars on Craigslist. Some pretty stange folks texing me late at night.
typical rich girl tweet
WILL U FOLLOW OR REPLY ME?MY BIRTHDAY IS ON TUESDAY AND THATS MY WISH, AND TOO MEET U! I LOVE U SO MUCH ♥ HAVE FUN IS ASIA! 7
#applestudios #wppi12 best tip - set up your photography biz as an LLC
Thank you!! I appreciate that and the RT. How are you these days? Happy #WW!
Walked Summer... I just finished a 4.16 mi run with Nike+ GPS.
love how informed you keep us here in the valley on the startups of the day. We're in the midst of something very cool right now
Thanks for letting me be your plus one last night at #SDMNOmothersday! Had a great time!!!
just found your side gig. Congrats! Coincidently I tried a new drink imported from Dublin tonight. Will share...
Saw my first Tesla Roadster. Wondering what good a car that when driven at a track would only last an hour or so? Lotus Elise please.
You totally rock and I'm so happy to have you on the team! Can't do this without you!
#youknowyouwakeupearlywhen you're 20 min early for class :|
For single depth relations you're ok. But what happens when THOSE objects have relations / collections? Can be a slippery slope
Spot trending now in Los Angeles, CA: BoHo - American (live updates)
Guilty - EEK! RT : It may be better if you spent less time pinning fitness pics on Pinterest and actually worked out.
Fantastic workshop by Ginny Redish on writing for the web. Bummed they don't have her books for sale here though!
doesn't even know how SICK it's gonna be Come drink, mingle, and get a postcard for a KILLER HEADSHOT DEAL!
didn't they do this last summer?
Makin Some Verses to These Songs, Studio Saturday, My Week is Planned Out
yay!!! That's a positive!
tomorrow will be great!
Can't sleep! Wish I didn't have to wake up super early :-/
I managed to get the groceries into the house but I think I'm done now. Glad I didn't buy anything frozen.
I think I found it. On the page where everything is pushed to the right, the div id "content" has the right padding set to 150px
This tweet is for UK People, what stamp would i need for an envelope being mailed from England to the USA? I'm trying to buy stamps.
Envying stars lol do you.
no problem
so great to see you today! Thanks for coming to Very happy to to have my copy, too.
Looking for guest bloggers! Let me know if you're interested! :)
follow these Atlanta Djs
Walk up to a mofo nd say I lik nd I want ya We can du dis da easy way or da hard way
Breezy Cool Morning in #NYC, but the light is LUMINOUS!!! Good Morning!!
It def need to happen soon
I couldn't be awesome forever... Sorry work :(
The Game of Propaganda - The RR
“: No it's not..” well good, cause I make alot of music especially for y'all.
economics makes no sense to me =[
It was a pleasure to host with you ! Thanks to for having us!
It's humid and rainy? (I'm about to leave the office, haven't been outside for a while.)
I just emailed you about this but I don't know if the address I had was viable
Thanks for the kind words and beautiful pics of our campus!
Sanchez sounds like a grown up Jake in LA.
Boys are so emotionally weak and fragile. If you have to prove how much you don't care, you're clearly overcompensating.
Futbol Club Barcelona!
Planning on having the deck open tomorrow!
love ya to woman!!!
Good stuff dont come easily
Fight with everything you have through the storm. And God will make a way for your destiny. Love all of you.
there is this guy that looks like you in my Psych class!
David copper field ass niggas
Indonesia? Seriously?
Taylor Is Our Song is the cutest trend, aw
Brooklyn Craigslist apartment ad description: "wooded floors." Like a forest?
...their minds are like one-lane roads—they work just fine until somebody approaches from the opposite direction. Tenzing Norbu
Yep that's him! I always watch cause it's my favorite, but now i have double incentive to watch haha
Thanks gorgeous!!!
...I will get her for an in depth discussion watch me ...on a
i just might:) how many do you need?
Scratch a dog and you'll find a permanent job. — Franklin P. Jones
thanks for the follow!...snort
Looking to buy a new Hawaiian shirt!! Something a little bright and loud!!!!!
so glad the thrashers won for its first game of the season with the capatals,best tough game yet, 4 to 2, WE WON
Only on Ticketmaster does a $22 ticket suddenly turn into $36.30 :/
We try to ask ourselves how we would want our pet treated.
want us to list your brand? please email us at
wow you said you were going to sleep
yea that trip will kill ya
Aah! Hugs to all of them! Happy Easter to you guys!
Both teams continue to brawl throughout the arena until security manages to subdue all four men.
For those golfers out there, you should check out Chevy Chase Golf Club in Wheeling, IL. Had a fantastic round there yesterday.
dear taylor swift i am inlove with you hahah you dont understand ive seen you multiple times and i love you a lot! <3-dave
about two hours to get to my hotel xD
True That!
Well that could work too :) Santa Barbara?
"As the suffumigations of the oppressed stomach, surge vp and cause the head-ac..." Dammit, Thomas. Give a guilty girl a break.
How you gonna say you're attending RTB but you have no money ? Lol
I'm alright with that deal.
Student in my class this morning in a Yale sweatshirt. New Haven's my home town. I miss it. Haven't been back in a long long time.
I hope this storm ends soon.
Ortiz Middle School Marching Baand-Houston Directed By Roderick Kennedy Named Honor Band For The 2010 MLK Day Youth Parade-Houston
I wish I could tell you. They haven't decided to get extras.
Hello Everyone, How is everyone doing tonight or day?
Hey can I get a WOOF over here? Show some love!
In New York. Filming for Dr. Oz
haha yep, 2nd july like a month earlier than planned <3 so excited now but at the same time really nervous! :P
Dear HR peeps: when the answer to an application inquiry is "You don't exist to me and let's keep it that way," just say so.
Putting everything in God's hands.
Work > Eat > Work > Gym > Eat > Bus > Skeeball > Cab > Sleep
Uhh drivers Ed test today I'm scared
J-lo cant even pick the right man how she gone pick the right winner. LOL
Since it's National Human Trafficking Awareness Day consider participating in one of trips to end modern day slavery
welcome . feel free to contribute to our previous tweets :D
#BeliebersAnd1DAreCool um okay who ever created this you cool...haha ooh i tried to say that w a straight face but I laughed 😂😂😂
Jamming to call me maybe in first period >
when you get older alot of these HOLIDAYS dont have meaning anymore....
I have never been as disappointed with the MKE Co Board as I am now. Not even during the Walker years have they failed the people this badly
glad to see you're on Twitter! Are you going to Congress?
lmao or u can just make the sounds under the helmet ha ha ha
nope, but is. I am on the ebooks panel. We're doing a non-fiction shout & share type panel at ALA, though.
awesome FOLLOW ME hahah
Steve Moore is killin' it tonight! Good job #32!
what did you end up getting?
We have the same last name, friends?
followback!!!,Is Awsome related to Watch Gossip Girl Online
Okay Chili!
I mean Gore, Jacobs, Crabtree, Manningham, Moss, Ginn, Vernon. Plus they drafted Jenkins and LaMichael James? They're gonna be crazy good.
Lead me not into temptation. I can find the way myself.
Feeling great after a tough bench day and a long night's sleep.
When in doubt, watch Scream.
Got a bit of a heavy heart today knowing that wont be there when I get home tonight..
fascinating that this idea takes you in a Marxian direction, which I don't think was Morgan's intention
how has drabek looked
save me one... 60 more days to go!
Bad call to pull
Your requests and Belmont BBQ on the Powerdrive at 5 w/ Helen Powers. 978 1023 or
NEW XBOX LIVE ACCOUNT STARTED TODAY ! GAMER TAG: CED NASH
good grades, enough sleep, a social life. You can only have 2. welcome to college
Awesome. There were mixed reviews from the panel crowd about their own departments. Glad to see this is less of a debate in places!
can someone please help some followers? PLEASE. just one shoutout will help
Just woke up. Good afternoon world.
To mistake a subjective view for the objective view is unproductive
i dont know
So Ron Artest's name is now officially "Metta World Peace." Contest: What should David Stern's new name be? I'll buy drinks for best idea.
« « #EverydayIThinkAbout how good God has been to me»»
Shake it for the birds and the bees (and the cats for )
Wow, I think I just had my first passive aggressive blog post written about me!
of course! ill take a pretty pic just for you lol...if you ever make it out to the east coast ill make you one:]
Organizational Readiness Checklist: category, task, due date, % complete, date complete, Accountable members, Responsible depts
oh yea lol. Good times!!!
Good but when i got home and seen you didnt follow me it turned out bad :(
MARA!!!!! HAPPY BIRTHDAY HUNNY! I LOVE YOU! HOPE YOU ENJOY! & DNT GET TOO DRUNK!
#EarthFair San Diego is So cool! Thanks San Diego & all our awesome volunteers
Hitting Up Starbucks With , Anyone Wanna Join? :)
C'mon Harry loves ya. I just want a follow back………and a chance to get him to notice ne……………
Nap. Then Bryant Lake Bowl with the Writer's Workshop at 7:30. You're invited!
love the #moo trending topic!!
r u at the game?! So jealous! Would love to be watching Andy's first game back
Made it to Alamogordo, NM last night. At least it's sunny...
My first reaction reading this was "huh?", until I saw your response. #grammarisimportant. I think it's meant as an insult..
You've graduated & you still hanging out with high school seniors?
the new dirty birds shirts were made in egypt. maybe they were just mad pissed about the design?
Real drinkers only mix whiskey with emotions.
And yet, having now seen Green Lantern, I can safely say that nothing in it is nearly as dumb as the "adamantium bullet"
just think about it
Most SM staff museums are also doing traditional digi tasks. So, if they are in SM, what are they not doing anymore?
Thanks to for the great snap-shots at #TheRockChurch session. BW and gal-pal - best PR Agency in SD - CIM, Inc
Hate to sound my age but Forever 21 stores scare the bejesus out of me.
": Saw & &A tonight. That shit made my night. I love & respect those 2 women so much.." <3 <3 <3
Phone lines are open - 317-736-0950 - call in and share your thoughts about the past week.
follow me and i'll follow you! cause i use twitter this much! (insert number here ranging from 1 to 99999999999[twitter count max reached]
It's pretty cool that is following me on Instagram now. I think they are hoping for #bathtweet photos. LOL
Having moves like Jagger!
I wanna make love in her parents bed :)
#RejectedPickupLines "If you were a transformer, you'd be Optimus FINE!"
Tenn makes $$ playing UK in FB? No way. They're forced b/c of conf, they'd do same thing we're doing.
Wave game tonight, Packer game Sunday. Enough said about my weekend
this makes me happy. #MCBW RT @ looking forward to hitting madison tomorrow with a grip fulla weird beer.
Thanks to all of the future scientists, engineers & colleagues! You were great!
The best relationship is when yu can be Lovers an Best Friends at the same time
Now I remember why I don't do chains. Potential for ambiguity is high even with data that should disambiguate
I've known it from the moment that we met!...theres no doubt in my mind where you belong
4 her needs...better test if possible. Women do not have Y chromosomes. Our Autosomal DNA test = total analysis all lines
thanks man
Sorry man I couldnt resist. You made it to easy. Ill chill now I know how it is when your team is losing. I grad from IU
Contest is officially closed...Thanks to all that tweeted us! Stay tuned to see who won....
"you so skinny, yo nipples touch" - rotfl 😝
Alaska was a bit of a surprise!
RT First pregame practice of the year!!!! Here we go Hop!
HAVE A GREAT WEEKEND!
oh beehive.
So yeah, I LOVE the mud!
“: Gunman reportedly wearing body armor kills at least 4 in Arizona, police say - ”BAD SAD STORY
I had a great day, until I got home -_-...
Last Monday classes of the semester for me! #Hyped!
😁 idk about that one 💜
what a very up n down twisting turning ep last night, wow!
Such a darn flirt!!! Gosh its killing me
:) RT : Just spotted an interactive ad on Nice!
good music
My shoes are ruined.
Very true! Had to email you his thoughts!
yea shoot em .
That smell. A kind of smelly smell. The smelly smell that smells...smelly
Today's Family Fun is INDOORS in #BkSq 1st Floor w/ Jr! Free event for ALL Ages w/ bar 21+ to benefit !
You have forced me to act on this one very important detail.
oh i see now..
Baltimore Family Battles Cancer & Poverty wp.me/p17ctE-7z #BGE #Baltimore #Poverty #Cancer #Family by:
I love City but they have got to start playing smarter Football
Thinking about changing our image and name....what do you think? Fresh start sounds nice
MT First day today - Baird's Business Solutions Conference in Boston. Follow #RWBBizSolutions hashtag for conference coverage.
I'm about to jump off the Brewz Cruise.
Missed ya tonight!
please DM us thanks
Ha! That hotel instagram was ridiculously funny. Where is that?
If only. Prior engagements. Are you going?
oh my! What's the problem hun?
I feel like Ryan braun is tom cruise in minority report.
This is not acceptable. You broke mah hart. *tear
Learning is not attained by chance, it must be sought for with ardor and diligence
If #Santorum doesn't think it's important to protect the Earth, Newt will be more than happy to rent him space on the moon.
RT : Teachers looking for a real-world news literacy activity will be interested in options available through Truth Squad....
Had a great time thinking things through with you the last few days, Rusty. Thanks!
this summer. We WILL do something.
Community Links is looking for sales People, If interested email us @
Your no longer a part of my life or my music don't flatter yourself
do u wanna follow me?:)
Must remember, despite all frustration, to not eat the marshmallow.
Awww <3 to you too girl!
You bet!
tonight you should follow me!
My friend is such a great guy but the kind of men he is attracted to... I better write about this.
it is a bit much but once in a while I think I deserve it.
lol I'm sorry I was being a bitch to you.
Im doing ok just watch the game
Hello Ladies! Hope all is well
This is #HARD!!
I totally take back all those times I didn't want to nap when I was younger.
the great thing about sports is u can always prove doubters wrong next year. Keep your head up and keep moving forward
That awkward moment when the rapper in Cher Lloyd's music video is 7...
Well hello I'm now following you cause said for me to. Anyway how are the traveling accommodations are they 1st class
So far Hugo has won 4 out of 6
hey sexy lmao
Enjoying a Leffe blonde.
Note to self, if brakes feel like they are going out they probably are
BELOW THE BRIM is looking to set up a headquarters in Columbus... Short North, Downtown...?? Weighing all options.
can't wait to hear and see pics!
Poster is up! Come talk about porn with me.
c'mon what did I do? LOL
GoodOldTimes when every girl had cooties
done..followed :-)
#iftheworldendsonsaturday I'm starting a support group for all rapture survivers.
Just gonna start keeping my ideas and comments to myself... I don't want you to think I'm too cool for you or better than you.
Bitch! I told you I needed to talk to you.
I totally agree , I love poms they're adorable . I think Husky's and Wolves are just beautiful & I don't like touch animals
Watching Bridget Jones for the 30th time, and face it, girls -- when life *seems* bleak, just watch this thing & you'll snap out of it.
Sunday, you are cloudy and cool.........I still love you.
keep up the good work
#Fortune500 Searching for PLANT MANAGER candidates in Illinois contact
Come join me, I setup a meeting on GoGrabLunch.com at Sawmill Lounge, Sherwood Park AB
Performing at Strawberry Moon Martini bar Wauconda with guitarist Andy Pratt May 12 6-9pm. Crazy good martinis.
good seeing u tonight! When u DJing next so I can show love?
I'm alittle over it!!! Ive been waiting waaaayyyyy too long for that video smh....
my friend has this gymclass heros bag and it reminded me of you lol. Btw I hope I see you!
Up bright and early. All emails returned.
When Kanye tweets, the Internet explodes
1 A, 2 B's and 1 C to finish off my last semester here at LSU!!! 😃😃😃
The Tables have Turned And I’ve Finally Learned That this is Makin Up for Every Day I was Gone
Can you be more specific? What song will fit after Zappa/Peaches? (I'm lukewarm on BR)
Game over! Spurs win!!!!
Please say he will be okay... he is to youmg to die..
So I want to make a page that is a Browns player, because almost all of my followers are Cleveland fans..
Join with us as we continue to pray for families across the nation who have been devastated by the recent natural disasters.
-- One of the best I have had (and I've had a lot) is The Moustache Ride Red!
I'll say team Chuck with all the love he gave UK last year.
Follow along w/ #philanthropyweek RT : Often 1 opportunity opens the door & propels a family out of poverty.
#Dateline is so fascinating tonight!
Exactly, that was my thought. No offer, so now deal with it... oh, the little Mets.
Love it. Residuals! RT : American Pie 2 is trending right now. Can only be bc of one man
I'm so happy to learn that MLB has rejected the Dodgers' TV deal with Fox. This should be the final nail in the coffin for those bastards!!
My first day was ok didn't get lost have ok teachers and had fun seeing friends
Uploaded a couple new jams to my site (garettheller.com).
i think i kinda judge people by their cars...which is silly, seeing as i don't even drive, so...
The most effective career plan is always written in pencil.
My colleagues have but they don't have access to her driver's license; police do.
DEADLINE EXTENDED: Capital Area Asset Builders is looking for a new EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. It could be you! Apply for this job now with cove…
This Nigga Tony Parker Be Ballin.
How so? I talked to u yesterday :)-- RT : so i missed talking to fans :( how sad
Excited for in Milwaukee! Wife is on call and can't come... Will need a date :-)
Yayayay!!!!!!!!! My Bubs is coming to NYC! I haven't seen him since Xmas! Cant wait
U2's 'The Joshua Tree' - can't believe it's been 25 years.
what's wrong with the washer? has water in it and won't drain?
Getting clothes, food & toiletries to those in need.
CABQ terminates contract with independent hearing officer who ordered APD reinstate police officer Russell Perea.
#Jing is a nice Windows alternative to
Txt me asap :O
“: Sitting on a stash of New Glarus....” // Two things I am: Swiss and Wisconsinite.
National MS Fundraiser last night entertainers M. Bolton, the Canadian Tenors, B. Allen. Much love 2 B. Allen hosting the event 4 18yrs
Congrats and the rest of the team. Great job, the 4 years of hard work certainly paid off!
CANT WAIT !! Now boyfriend is going to be beast what I'm saying is BEAST ! I love you kidrauhl !! #swag 34
I can do this!! I will finish my bibliography and have my album ready by the time I have to go to school! #peptalk #moralbooster I can do it
Despite having the means, he lived his life in extreme poverty out of concern for the feelings of the poor villagers.
Any ideas for DiY weapons that we can make?
Well I won't do it on purpose but I just need to succeed my exams and that means studying loads and no twitter.. :/ ♥
She likes you, You like her. What the fuck are you waiting for? She might be THE ONE. Are you really gunna let her get away?
I don't know what to wear tomorrow :(
IT WAS A GREAT NIGHT
For the 10:30 PM show at Comic Strip Live NYC, coming to the stage: Paul Mecurio
>:o) Another beautiful day at the . Love it over there!
well damn, i best get my ass into gear for this niche in the market ;) hehe
excited that I now have access to LibGuides!
GOOGLE US AND LIKE OUR FACEBOOK PAGE SEARCH BLOCK STARZ ENTERTAINMENT
Of all things. Romney telling those people the cookies looked like they came from 7/11. "You didn't make those cookies" What an ass.
Thanks for stopping in today, David! We hope you enjoy your visit to the -- we know we always love it!
Lmaoooo RT : “ im sure zeta love me btw”nope. They are going to assassinate you and curve their symbols in your chest LOL
do u deliver to the USA? If so, is it free delivery? 3abele 2ekol 3endkon bas chway b3id!
RT reminder - come see our bootiful demos and eat dimsum, drink beer, drink wine! 5404 Wisconsin 7th fl park on p3 p4
!!! RT “ I hate when people dont text me back that shit is annoying but its soo cool”
hm. I will look into it. I've just gotten up and running with , however. Thanks!
Thank you!
RT : Keep videos short, timely, relatable and realistic. DO NOT think of it as an ad. Remember to experiment.
� You cannot be lonely if you like the person you're alone with. � Wayne W. Dyer
We gon dedicate this 'townWayne show 2 everybody that we loss 2 The struggle
Too late 4 for me; Hopefully not 4 others! RT Parenting: Back to School w/o blowing your budget - 6abc.com bit.ly/qH68sk
what'd she say?
Patrick Is My Twin(: <333333
You Are So Beautiful ♥
Chips and salsa for lunch. I'm so healthy.
Yes unprofessional pictures are better because we get to see you in your most natural state!
Together we make stars , we are truly fly...
Have an interest in sponsoring a pro golfer? Contact us via DM.
Loving the storytelling NBC is doing, making #KYDerby138 interesting for mainstream viewers.
If the Orioles win today, it means they hate school kids.
We're awfully glad to have them
true but it is the majority talking rubbish
I'm so excited to hear an update! I have no doubt you'll do great things ...again! :)
Assassins Creed Revelations is my favorite of all the Assassin Creed games.
- I know, right? I'm so jealous. Some of my favorite people all in one room!
Probably because the Tigers already had one of the best, if not the best offensive first basemen in the league.
your not just procrastinating are you? ;)
so awesome!!
Realized I still have a full week of classes and meetings next week before finals, so won't be able to attend. Next year!
Maybe I'll do a light few miles on the treadmill later. Do you workout when you have a cold and are congested?
fear doesn't exist anywhere except in the mind. ~ Dale Carnegie
Not sure how Sean Payton can win an appeal when he's appealing to Goodell. Might as well say "c'mon man, cut me some slack"
RT : #CrashCourse the Music Picture Coming Soon. Shotout to !
Listening to some great classical rock pieces. In love!
Yes, I still make wishes by blowing on dandelions... So what?
is a proud supporter of the United Nations 2012 International Year of Sustainable Energy for All
I am officially planning my new york trip for next week (20th-24th) any recs would be great, we're mostly veggie/vegan
me too... Movie night!
: like 4, it was tied going in to the fourth quarter!
If comcast says "we'll be out between 10 and 6" , can I say "I'll pay my bill between now and sometime soon"?
90s in Boston, wicked wind in Wi, snow in Mn? What?
correction: faithful animal/yeti -- like in Harry and the Hendersons.
I love it here! Only been about a year but its pretty great!
how are you? (:
I never drink water because of the disgusting things that fish do in it
OMG!! You are so hott :) ijs.
Hey , you can download our tracks on our Facebook or Reverbnation for frizzle free frizzle! Thanks!
#CharlotteBruse Ohh How I Love That Brand ! :)
At steak and shake with my girll!
Boyd Martin was AMAZING. So glad he's in the lead! Remington is so awesome.
For no good reason tonight, being that it's my night off.
Enjoying the morning storm with the little one and the dogs while mom is running errands.
why did you run away bb and i best be invited to your graduation....
Money the Fame :D
Productive morning so far.. Today consists of Work, practice, work.
hay loser call me I'm on way to Houston I wanna see ya slut
Spots open 8/2, e-mail & we'll send you a reminder! Follow for more updates!
Trianon douche bags are already out at the pool. Way too early in the season for this!
Morning Rockstars! > Kind words are the music of the world. - F. W. Faber
Penske Trucks thanks for your good price on a rental.
thanks for the verification info - i'll cross my fingers
thanks! Btw your presentation = absolute highlight. Loved.
:: Coming up in Sound Off: Should people with criminal records drive school buses? Join us and on Live
THANKYOU NOTE! ThankyouDear Lord, For crediting 24 more hours i.e 1440 minutes86,400 precious seconds today to give me chances of a lifetime
LIKE on FB for your chance to win tickets!
Monday Night Snack after 10pm {Shrimp Fritters, Black Garlic Aioli}
Well, I guess there is always PJ40? Or I can buy the #PJ20 video.
Im definitely going to come for an appointment ASAP :-)
I'll send it ask over to you from my laptop later!
Tell us how you are staying cool and safe during this lingering heatwave.
Hey guess what? you're perfect
Busy Day of #Meetings, Meetings, Meetings!
on my way to visalia with my boys o comedy to make the funny...hide your sheep visalia
Don't even want to text #oomf any more..... Ever.
take it to the head new classic fire!!
Got turned up!
You never had the rights meds, then. 'Cause there's magic there as well!
Ima spit with heat until I get my credit, I'm a verbal martial artist like I'm signed to shady records.
Keeping it classy at Fireside
I miss the #Odyssey already.
how did you get your presentation to sync from ipad to computer during norms retreat? i thought that was very cool!
There's been a lot of talk of footnotes among #twitterstorians lately. Am I the only one who enjoys reading them?
Caps with sound on now!
Remember the three R's: Respect for self; Respect for others; and Responsibility for all your actions
well… I'll send u a message
I just might my left calf is killing me.
"So are you the only white girl in San Diego?" "Uhm..Pretty much."
Few reactions to the fish-oil samples. One: "It tastes like pineapple." Another person asked for seconds (!)
My lips are chapped and until I buy Chapstick I'm not making the "M", "B", or "P" sounds- because they make the situation feel a lot worse.
I like walking in the rain but after i feel nasty cause i'm all wet.
well not yet, but the idea of it alone is quite exciting... Whom is this lovely mum of yours?
Yeah wanna of my videos is on Beta cuz it was submitted to networks for airplay.
still shows shipping soon. I've read you can order it the night B4 and it always arrives on release day. So i still think i'm ok.
The US Coastguard is trying to help four crew members who were hurt when a large wave crashed onto..
what are you doing this weekend? I'm in town let's hang out.
missing you, lady!
Teens, come get your Game On at the library with Xbox Kinect today at 4pm
I was with your boyfriend yesterday. He says 'Hello'
Loved the Bollywood scene tonite on
if you become friends with Mila, hook a brother up. :-P
hahaha literally loling you're too funny
It really is. I'm just like wow, that's all that find me attractive. So depressing...
Now that I can agree with.
Why do people find the need to wear shorts when it's 50 special giant fat girls!
- Where are you going? I'm starting in USC's this fall!
Thanks to for their submissions today! Makes us incredibly happy. :)
"Everything I'm sayin I'm super saiyan like Goku" What a beast!
Thanks for the love and support :) We'll have a very new version of Words Well Chosen up on Youtube very soon!!
I am so frustrated
There sort of doing the whole hound thing like it's the Loch Ness monster. Okay. I'll bite. (I still hate this story though)
“: I hate when people are unprepared to win! Biggest night in Hollywood-if you're nominated, write an acceptance speech!”
Need to tweet more often. Reading new book and loving it.
worthy for sure!!
This is my point: megachurch pastors would rather tickle your ears with rock music and famous guest speakers than preach the truth. Payday!!
Tokyo, steak n shrimp
If Google can't find the answer, then it's not a question.
definitely my favorite line..but I'm a Whovian n00b.
but you laughing though? #MamaIsa lol
RT 20 more views until my next cover video!! #GoWatch --->ttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3DyqRpnYsyg&feature=youtube_gdata_player
Good morning! Even though it's cloudy and gross it still feels like its going to be a beautiful day. :)
I love my 6 pack so much that I protect it with fat ;D
hacked and fixed... And people are saying bad things... Lol
My 5-year-old just informed me that when she grows up she's going to be "like a half-vegetarian" who eats no meat except for bacon.
Whose DropBox folder?
myTab founder is having a Cinco De Mayo party tonight. We've an Angry Bird pinata called Pedro. You like that name?
Cool Idea! Bucky grads in ag! : #SO to people reading my messages on the sidewalk about
All Seeing!!!
Alright so I havnt been paying attention to the Heat games and I don't understand why they are doing this foolishness -_-
ah yes. couldn't track that down on slow hotel wifi. I'm looking forward to reading the paper
This nigga tried to play me!
over 3 years now... i lived in ireland for 2 years before i moved here. you know i really like nm! were you born in abq?
It is a scientific impossibility to overstate the awesomeness of the #Avengers movie. ()
So thankful god placed me in the arms of the best eye institute.
Yes it does!
I really don't wanna talk about I'm sorry
Can anyone recommend a good guide to making jam?
are u doin it still
I have the best sistaa 😘“: Making home made cookies for my sissy! ”
lol I know you check mine!
There was like a week ago when I checked... Idk maybe she decided to show up.. Or shell be traveling across seas and taking s break
Where does the day go???
"Scratch a lie, find a thief..."
I'm loving the HP TouchSmart 9100's that we've got at work...need to get one once I can rationalize buying a fourth computer.
Can't Have Sex by Myself ... Nd I Dont Think He Wants To ... LOl
In my ♥, I know who won "Compassionberry" " ...I didn't have a chance 2 beat an ailing Bret Michaels! #littleturncoats LMAO
Wishing everyone a Happy Diwali!
haha I really need to get their music on my iPod. Soon.
Your knife; my back, my gun; your head.
Yeah but it's not the Rolento players fault that the other character is throwing fireballs from a distance lol.
just bought a new area rug that's really going to tie the room together. cc
RT : It's National Library Week – what are you reading? Here's some good stuff to hunt down at your local library:...
My hometown aint too bad huh? Keep an eye on ! RT : Little Rock! From the bottom of my liver...thanks for the party.
I don't even have anyone to pour out to right now.
Buckland loaded a boat with musicans to drive around the Arctic & tell what is happening in a new way. capefarewell.com
I sure wish the MSM...ABC & CBS would quit using Layvron's baby pictures on the news! THAT kid didn't beat up Zimmerman!
Aint Nothing But A G Thang Baby
Why do people just not get it? U explain things to them and how their actions affect people, and they dont get it/care.
Now my life is sweet like cinnamon! ...
Yep yep. When? Also, what are we doing for mother's day?
Happy Mother's Day Ladies, Enjoy.
haha oh be quiet :P
Looking forward to it! xo
He has been sick for a while.... Kidney failure!!!
happy mother's day! que pasa amiga
the south!
And Paul says we don't have enemies all around the world. Huh.
Or do you not think so far...ahead...
There's also World On A Wire on blu-ray here for $20. Oh wait - no there isn't. YOINK! 😃
sick!!!!! I've been missing partying with the puño.....
good stuff, post was geared towards new member referrals, some CU's & many banks are offer cash to join
Booking auditions is a game of inches, what are doing to get better, stand out and win?
GOOD CALL
Just recieved some advance copies of April - Phyllis Van Doren's Spring Interior Design Report looks great!
i am on my way to your house now
can we interview you, , , and on wednesday at the wallingford CT show 8/3 ? 276
Everyone in Louisville support your local artists.Buy new album.Im gonna check it out,I heard its pretty tight!
S/O to people who haven't done any homework yet over break !
Sundays over already?
I saw that
The way to combat noxious ideas is with other ideas. The way to combat falsehoods is with truth. Douglas, William O.
Police told the new next door neighbors they can't work on cars on the street. So now, the neighbors are working on boats!
you're right. Looks like your run of the mill action film.
get some good wiper blades $40 and anti-freeze windshield washer fluid
If you got sumthin to say bout me let the shit be known....
Attenuation of age-related changes in mouse neuromuscular synapses by caloric restriction and exercise
Follow my personal account?
Its amazing how when you stand your ground you have to be playing games!
PC > Xbox & PS3
I really like your Angry Birds tweet. It got me lol.
Stocks go up, stocks go down, watching indexes that are painted can't help. Hedging will. Not a science, but an art I am here
The uofl vs Davidson game is being terribly officiated already!
Happy Friday! We have a delicious variety of Belgium Beers on draft and by the bottle!
you are a tweet machine on fire today!
the next time someone asks me why I'm abstaining from sex, I'm gonna ask them why they're having sex. SMH. LOL
THEY ALL KNOW! THEY ALL KNOW! ah foi mt foda.
I hate when I have those random deep thoughts like what do I wanna become when I'm older
Coffee is honestly the best part of my day.
I should join the Air National Guard?
thank you kindly sir! (resumes admiring all the North Korean-esque propaganda in Praetoria)
St. Patrick's Day trip to the WI Humane society.
Happy HTTP Status Code 401 Unauthorized Day!
Nothing wrong with a cheap tester. I just get tired of using a photocopier for R&D. That doesn't advance the industry even a little
Ann Marie is the best congress women we have ever had
A girl with awesome taste!!
I guess sharks aren't so bad after all, If a stranger came into my house wearing a speedo i'd probably attack him too..!!
Vollmann's The Rainbow Stories? Callenbach's Ectopia? Salas' Lay My Body on the Line? Just throwing some out there.
I'm not there and I'm laughing! I can always count on you for having a glass when I am :) xoxo besos!
Me : Go : Go Jayla Me : Get that lol : Get that Jayla, the bigger the better xD lmfaooo i cant
any time my brotha from another motha
nun. On break for school
Hey! is great, not hating on her at all, just a lyric in a song, that is all!
“: If anymore leads get blown at Miller Park tonight, John Travolta might fly in” awesome
Im so proud of u love...yay!!!!
I need to fuck a bitch!
Everything can be learned, including, to a very large extent, to be what you are not. You can learn to be pretty if you are plai
I say how much you need? He say a lot. I say you know people kill for that drug right? I just hope he got the message
RUN! Hey what health and technology advice do you have for zombie attacks?
Guilty until proven innocent
Forgot to bring the video camera. WHAT THE FUCK!
see you soon! Or maybe not?
Cant wait to hear the new album!! :) Xx
Ambition is a start to ur goals. The reality is ur vision is to be obtained with faith in urself with our creator guiding the way!
RT : I'm too cool to be smoking weed
#Nowplaying The Last Song Im Wasting On You - Evanescence <3
Feels great right? RT As of this morning Credit Card debt is nonexistent in my life!
IT'S THAT IMPORTANT
that's short for am juggling and dropping balls at the same time :)
My three keys to success: one, work hard. Two, be your own person. & Three, have a passion for what you're doing. ~Juli Inkster
this stupid website is spammin all of my followers just ignore it, its not true
2 auditions today. One for a kind mentor the other for an evil bad ass. Fast U turn ahead!
I'M SCARED D:
Honda Classic started today and McIlroy is right there again
~~~~~~~~~~Wrong! Not all maybe some, but if men act right then women, would not act up! Whats good for you, is same for her.
*Waves back* Hello.
It's great knowing that the only thing Heat fans get to celebrate are free agent signings and Lakers losses
you should have come to the Derby with us!
Put your heart, mind, intellect and soul even to your smallest acts. This is the secret of success. ~Swami Sivananda
no rain! Picking up photos, counting cash in cash box, securing headphones and heading up to the storage unit!
Wait... its raining in LA again?!
Big meeting today. Boss and I already plan to work "silos" and "echo chamber" in at least twice.
Nice 10 miler this morning in the Cleveland MetroPark. It had a little of everything. Convo, hills, snow, laughs & more.
Anderson, the STUPIDITY & CHEESINESS; the DESPICABLE PARTISANSHIP of the Romney "bullying story" is BEYOND EMBARRASSING....
That's great advice! Thanks.
Watching Veronica fondle a handful of Cheerios for the first time.
Cinnamon challenge complete
AN OTHE R DRINK!
Watching Parks and Rec Season 2. I have eaten at the restaurant where Ron and Tammy have their argumentative/sensual reunion.
damn right we should burn one sometimes together huh
tweet any Tech Sources/Activities used in Social Studies classroom to
what font program do you use on OSX?
RT The IRC's New Roots garden in San Diego is a veritable United Nations of farmers and foods.
It's funny because it's true.
Q re CC Expn: if Coastal Comm says can approve only w modifications, then what? (Thinking of the low cost pub access solution in plan.)
The Grammar Police called. They're all committing suicide.
A big happy birthday to the one and only
Great. I hear the opposite from some.
thanks u! :3
Thx Beth, for your always active participation. You deserve a shout-out!
#SAGawards Outstanding Female Actor in a Comedy series goes to BETTY WHITE! Yes!!!!! Go Betty!
Chronic 2001 better than the OG doe !
Golfing at Yale
AWW UR SO SWEET TELL UR DAD THAT I SAY HAPPY FATHERS DAY
There's an #Evernote version specifically for schools. Has lots of cool features & disc. rate.
A #BFMusicFactoid - today in 1967 #TheWho made its U.S. concert debut in
Smfh i really hate when people think its okay to act funny one day then the next wants to be your buddy. Foh!
Team basketball is such a lost art today in the NBA. It's two guys playing pick-and-roll or one guy posting up, and 3-4 players watching.
make sure the world spoils you today :)
its always the subtweet hate right? lol after graduation, all will be well, hang in there haha
CONGRATS to Oxygen4Energy Athlete Nichole Wangsgard for winning the Presbyterian Hospital Invitational Crit this past weekend in NC!
Text me...
completely soakedd! never ride the raging river....gonna go get airbrush tatooos and eat lunchh(:
save it for tomorrow night?
: Drat… missed this completely… I'll see you all next time...
I got an email today about it and I think they mail us checks but I think it's also possible to get a direct deposit if you want!
: Anything like Roger Daltrey crying out "Meet the new boss, same as the old boss"?
I'm right there with you, Alexander. Already had the terrible & the horrible. Just waiting for the no good & the very bad to add to my day.
Cadillacs are like rolex watches... For the geezers!!!!
I so feel you on that , *shrugs.. don't really care what branch, just tryna go .
Learning is about seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting & touching.Integrating your senses. How have you tapped into your senses today?
Words hurt. </3
love you to!!! Cant wait to see you lady
yeah you should've answered the phone....
So glad you enjoyed it!
Looking forward to tonight's Audio Tree session here at JIRA! Young Buffalo live at 8pm
She ant me
You got that smile, that only heaven can make, I pray to God every day that you keep that smile. You are my dream.<3
": I'm taking Ty he's been impressive." I'd agree, he made the series go to 7, just lost steam
May the best man win.
time for bed hockey boy.
Happy Hour special at #Pirates Hall of Fame Club > Clevelander at #Marlins Park
Thanks, feel great today! Gearing up for B-12 mania over here.
RT Nice! : Jarvis Cocker wipes his arse with the News of the World onstage at T in the Park!
My heart got hypothermia learning since a lil kid
We're shooting a new commercial, getting ready for the start of TRUCK MONTH! "Deal"!
Catching up w/ people on Facebook, watching the playoffs, and waiting for my husband to get home from work... I'm bored out of my mind!
If I'm so fake cum c me perform at Broadway comedy club on Nov 18th in nyc
Today's weather is perfect for a drum circle.
beware the inappropriate lol.
Woo! Finally been confirmed registration for Can't wait to go! :D
Why did I not know Matthew Weiner is from Baltimore?
Good luck to those trying to win tickets on RT : #VanHalen have postponed all concerts after June 26th w/out giving reason
Happy Mothers Day to all of the Moms out there!! You're loved and appreciated.
I wonder who is subtweeting lol
Think is a great move. Takes substance
Just had to do it....I need Jesus everyday all day
Up w/ Deuce & he keep lickin his balls o_O
Shout out to whack ass niggas and their insecurities...BANG
yeah I feel the same way lol
Instead of getting ready i'm on twitter smh
no so i could meet up with he at like nine somewhere xD
We will be going in spring, daughter in UK due her 2nd in march.
So glad you loved 's keynote! Power + Passion? You’re “The Ringleader” – Motivating and vigorous! Compelling!
I COMPLETELY FORGOT ABOUT THAT.
hey Mr. LV cab. Do you want to take a Twitterer to insert coins from wynn?
Magnetite? O.o
Lets Make These Moves Champ
Cool can't wait to read it
indeed, I might be a little smarter than that
My hair really needs to get better.
follow he's an amazing singer look him up on YouTube he's AMAZING !!!!!!!!
RT : Portland City Hall locking its doors as march heads that way
hate studying for exams
we used to be so close an now at the most your a ghost of what used to be.
#FIXVOTING Reducing time for early voting NOT combating FRAUD - combating VOTING by Americans! Need MORE early voting time - NOT LESS!
i LOVE Some Girls!!!
Squeezing in an episode of Sex and The City before I start my weekend officially!
welcome home!
especially enjoyed the 3d maps in but was not so happy about how they were used..
why wouldn't you?
Q: over 40 in interview they ask Wont you be bored in this position-I was at job 12 years! Doesn't this show that I wont leave in 6 months?
I HATE COMPUTERS!
Finally got my XBOX 360 Elite!!! So stoked!!!
Aw lol I had a pit bull she had 9 puppies then she died!
: It should be a good series. If Perkins is healthy and the Lakers play up to their potential it should be a good series.
For the price of 2 beers at the bar, you can enjoy 30+ different beers @ Much Ado About Brew. Get tix before we sell out kgoradio.com/beer
. We will draft oline, but most improvement is believed to come from new scheme. I think our guys r underrated
TELL PPL TO FOLLOW ME LOL
have u read the book?...great movie too
ido was in the room I would have hit him for how he talked to you.
.!-_!~ G1 CERTIFIED WET TSHIRT CONTEST --- FRIDAY CLUB DRAMA --WANT TO GET IN FOR FREE?? TXT ME I WILL TELL YOU HOW---214 609 3316 --
Kobe to clutch
how come you locked your account? someone messing with you? am i gonna have to choke a bitch?
holy mother, Lauren. Those look AMAZING!
Again for !
Learning about EdgeRank from
Uprooting rid of all the spam bot followers by unfollowing everyone. Don't unfollow me if you are human, promise to follow you back;-)
well that's always goo:) I know you Miss tinychat bestfriendfddd:)
#McCall Smith, The Double Comfort Safari Club. Soothing Sunday reading for a bit of decadence to avoid thinking about unpleasant tasks later
I believe in God. I just don't think he's very spiritual.
MT : Says at #DigitalGovU, 4 Things to Remember: "1. Social Media is free like a puppy is free. It takes work."
Welcome new readers from Friday's promotion. New website for us and our novels coming very soon!
i know
sure. its a good idea but 10+ others already at it… and i have yet to find one that makes it seamless. betting on !
POTUS tells fundraiser decision to support same-sex marriage "was a logical extension of what America is supposed to be." (via
Sipping on #water, watching the #Clippers make a comeback. #NBA here at Library Bar&Grill!
Maybe to Windsor, so I can still live in this area but I get TSN. Sick of ESPN and their NBA score updates but no hockey on BML
Graham: The city took the step of being the successor agency bc it wanted a say in how AB 26 is being carried out.
o yea i forgot it was!
If only guys like Hosmer could really get the top part of the order REALLY going.
#WhatHurtsTheMost is when u find out your so call best friend was talkin a hold a bunch crap about u!
i'm learning how to make a bridge [:
if you're gonna hate the least you could do is use correct grammar
oK, I admit, I am thrilled!!!
Plan to come to the #burger bar of course!
March seems to be a bad month for you guys. Losing clients after sticking with you last March :-(
What's your favorite Belgium beer? We've got a few of 'em at half price tonight!
What? Run into a pole again?
RT : coming in tonight to promote the Blackhawks Luxury Box Raffle! Redeem a $1 Bartab drink during the game to enter!
We had a winner of the Miranda tix, but they couldn't go. I just picked another name..is it you? Check your DM!
Ebay of Pigs
Feeling so creative!! But have a headache so I am feeling so lazy too! Inspired =)
I think the dot races might be a little more competitive than this game
The crowd was so into last night and so out of it tonight. This is baseball, it's a 7 game series and we are still in it, come on!
Thanks! Happy Friday :) MT : Follow Friday: Vendor Edition: ...
"It looks both backward for causation and forward for remedial measures." Victor Turner, on Divination, from The Forest of Symbols
I did. Did you find out via his twitter earlier? Lol
thanks for following!
A man's stuff is the most valuable in the world. But when he dies, people go in his home to clear it out, they say: What is all this crap?
ahaha hell yeah. Where you at
I like The Happening.
hell yea lol
The anticipation of how my hair will turnout is the worst part
Here's what we know, what do you know, in crisis situation. MT Great work yesterday on breaking news by
. PLZ RELOCATE OUR CONVENTION
When the mind rests upon the Self within it no longer indulges in material or sensual thoughts. Its gains self-restraint.
Absolutely, it follows. I knows herds of unemployed writers, editors, and fact checkers.
OMM! OH MY MAHONE? I HAVE ONE OF THOSE! He's tickling me right now(:
what back ground picture lol
I can't wait till april vacation I need a break!!!!! Ug
In 09 minutes my TL will become #TeamBreezy & claiming they been with him since " Run It "
I love that you mentioned me in the wet hair tweet.
Me: mom can i go see woman in black? mom: no. your not ready me: im almost 13 and it has dan radcliffe! mom: maybe. if i can see it
girl, that ain't good🐗
“: Are you #uprising with us tonight? Rally starts at 7pm! Join us! #LAthtr #DTLA”
to be love by you....
i can go for some bdubs right about now
Who would have ever guess that John Terry and Puyol would have disagreement?
Thanks for the RT!
My condolences & prayers go out to Valerie Simpson, and their daughters on the passing of Legendary Songwriter; Nick Ashford!
Good Luck Today End regular season on winning note
I clicked on your link and a Justin Bieber ad popped up next to the article. HOW APPROPRIATE!!!
The first public theater built in England was called 'The Theater'. A nation of innovators.
#followfriday peoples of interest
Hey it was nice seeing you last night! That should happen more often.
Thank you :)
That pic is from Spa-ghetti Day!
When your teacher asks for a volunteer & somone says "I volunteer as tribute" ha this actually happened in my class.
I want some cake.
Yes RT : A6 Women's Health & Safety!
I was so star struck lol. He was like I heard you couldn't come out so I wanted to talk to you before I left Dallas.
Great song!
WELL TOO BAD CAUSE YOU SUCK AT TIEING THEM 😌
RT : Hiring again....looking for account manager to run brand + celebrity programs. Must have 5+ years experience. Tweet me.
been up with the roommates since 4am watching the news- just starting to give us warnings. Everyone check your kits for water & batteries!
Casey Pachall highlighted a record-setting game with a 42-yard touchdown pass to Skye Dawson with 4:26 left to lift TCU to a 31-24 victor
Seeing Savannah tonight <33
Nice! it's cold and raining here in Austin!
I'm watching "Step Up 2 The Streets" on ABCfamily! :)
Thank you for following us! If there was ONE tweet we could tweet about you or yr business, what would it be? Please DM me
I ran into and #courtneyjancocolous today and they wouldn't let me cut for food:3
Or I'm bipolar not sure.
The moon wasn't big tonight at all, maybe I caught it too late. Gonna try to see it again tomorrow.
Fine tuning the tandem for tomorrow's trip on the Empire Builder.
no, not true, April Fool's from NPR- I should have checked more. :)
RT : Chris Brown hits her, Eminem lies to her, Drake can't remember her name = The life of Rihanna.
- thank you sir
PR tip: When you are sending a press release to a newspaper, you DO NOT need to put a Word doc in columns. Come on now.
Wow my granddad old... u kno u old when u talk about nothing
Tonights the big game. Who is going to win Kansas or UK?
July 30th club vain. W.thekeyplayerz.com. Be there
i believe so but they sell it there in Indiana?
Happy St. Patty's Day! Become a fan of HRL on FB by Tues March 23rd for a chance to win a FREE 2 night stay! :)
No, seriously, I'm here and of sound mind, but I have to catch up on my other stuff before I can deal with your not-so-urgent matter. Jeez.
Et Cetera => And the rest, often abbreviated etc. or &c.
''Everyones birthday party!'' Excited for this weekend
we just finished our first tour and we'll be releasing a new single pretty soon though!
on my way to the Vans Warped Tour in Houston!!! I'll be updating the scene all day, so follow me if you want to know about it!!! Peace b ...
Looking at my feed & wishing I was in Austin for #tilts (#tilts2011?) today. Missing talks by , , , &c.
Headed to the Bats game.
Up watching Martin...
When your jammin out to your favorite song and the headphones get snagged on something random.
Throwing down an acoustic jam with YFT in Woodland Hills tonight. Sticks. Check. Bag. Check.
I like to tweet one-handed while taking a leak.
Had a great time this weekend! Thanks to all !
So its decided! My hair dresser and I both want preppy white boys with swag lol
yup sounds good homie
WTF MY VIDEO ISNT WORKING IT SAYS ACCESS DENIED WTF MAN.
Neck: stiff neck
Me too!
I'm absurdly happy that my college age daughter is snoozing on the sofa while I read.
just.. Leave it
Thanks for the RT! Are you watching Delhi/Kolkata now?
*WINNING* #teamtigerblood speak your mind your lips have been sealed to long express yourself and hell with everybody else..
In the past 2 years, someone insisted to me that their professor told them they must use two spaces after a period.
Video Amazing Cup Stacking Skills This Kid Got Fast Hands - cups stacking
Moved my blog off of UT's servers...
The Angels are bowling ✌
thank you all for the MT's during the #jazzday concert last night, we appreciate you!
Happy Chocolate Day everyone. The bake shop at City Tavern is cranking out #chocolate hearts glazed with ganache.
I'm so tired but I can never sleep when I want to 😔😞
I hope cums his pants on his movie date so his bitch can point and laugh at him >:) lmao
Papa john looked like he was on crutches and they edited them out in the commercial running during Sunday night football.
DONTT U HATE WHEN U LOSE THE ONES U LOVE ?? </3
the guys are tops... glad to have them as part of CodeSquare!
Send questions for the Next "Ask Aunt Lisa Video"!!! I'm going to pick about 8 questions & give away another 2 signed posters NEXT THURSDAY!
you're only with her because you don't like to be alone.
": <3 JOE <3 omg join our marriage :'-)"we can all marry
I finally stand my grounds and now I'm being respected more than ever. Like me for me, not for who u want me to be.
that's my problem with AOP. Nobody seems to know about any other useful application.
Get ready for St. Pattys Day-stop by for our Baileys and Guiness CUPCAKES-Come early for best selection or call ahead
I can. Or how about lack of response.
That's because you're a tool.
- Very nice. It's a great team. Everyone is working very hard to make an exciting show.
I can't remember my first time! Ha!
My bro gave me a Miller High Life... It's not too bad.
“: It’s easier to lie to me than to yourself”
No coffee within 4 miles, and car. I see why crackheads are always walking around.
Firefighter support: Lt. Gov. Rebecca Kleefisch receives endorsement from Milwaukee Professional Firefighters Association.
It Just Mean Boa! lol. Wassup?
Happy Friday mate!!! Enjoy the wkend. I'm listening to Forbins from SB IX. C'mon dates!!
We have a nugget tonight!!!! :)
¡Hoy es noche de Carne Tremula! Drop by the tonight for some serious booty shaking!
I MADE THIS FOR YOU!!!
is that the same aide who works on etch a sketch????? :)
ouch. Get better soon. The rest should help.
Are you ready for #chicago June 8 with NJ ?
do you have a iPod?
Congratulations Emilyy.!! so happy for you.!! love ya girl!
Hi! How can I contact you?
I REALLY hate sitting in class with a rain wet shirt...
Inaction is not only the result, but the cause of fear~ Norman Vincent Peale
when is it?
I would rather watch Hoarders than the NBA. It's too much about self indulgence.
Innovators getting ready for nashville and Tennessee area
Happy New Year Ray!!! I wish you an awesome 2012!!!
“: Getting married before 25 is kinda like leaving a party before 10pm #AmIRight?”
Hi All check out our website for our amazing sales on our boog 77 tried and true home based business www.createmoneyweb.com
Today starts 25¢ weekend! Anything at Diversity Thrift with GREEN tag, electronic, clothing, household, is only a quarter!! Don't miss out!
people don't like because of his FAME and LOOKS! But because of his talents, and the inspiration he gives <3
I think I am going to start stalking Paulina Gretzky's #Instagram account...
One more month and I'll be in Lima. Can't wait to try out the fantastic restaurants there.
Thnx bro, those fx you threw on there are crazzy.. can't wait to crack some more out soon!
I 💘 UA Bookstore!
bleh. i didnt get to meet im so sad :(
I was freaking out. Smoking is so unattractive. I'm glad that wasn't you. It was just a stupid person. :)
is awesome because it has a classy atmosphere. i feel like i'm in sex and the city when i'm there!
Wait... I jus saw what ur talkin about. That's a generic tweet automatically posted by Soundcloud when u load sumthin new.
": With all my heart I praise the LORD! I will never forget how kind he has been. -Psalm 103:2"
Cool & rainy in San Diego. First panel on the schedule is Danny Elfman
“: I hate when I'm so happy about something and then my happiness just dies... Because of one thing. ONE LITTLE THING.”
O.. Like Sum for me !
You have an AWESOME job!
haha man I'm boutta go fishing at the river, you wanna go?
100 LIKES & I'll Sing Boyfriend For My Facebook Peeps (;
Don't worry about the people who hate you, worry about the people who love you.
I don't care if you see my messages days before :3 I just want u to see em and have great days and lovely times :3 I LOVE U <3
very exciting meeting today with one of our marketing partners on a viral YouTube campaign t. More to follow.....
Seriously, siting in this class for like 3 hours is a waste of my time!
Went to weed one book, ended up weeding 12 shelves of books.
My phone really needs to stop acting retarded, before I somehow manage to throw against the wall or something.
This organic granola is a subtle blend of aromatic barn sweepings and fresh bark mulch.
Norfolk might to be outta there.
Long day of shooting is over! Time 4 food...a drink and my couch!
RT : We are honored to be featured in the case study with ! Public Relations in Urgent Care...
what about a pool girl?
Don't confuse fame with success. Madonna is one; Helen Keller is the other.
1.29 a taco... You live on mars or what?? Lol
On the road to Canada!
Thanks for the #ff yesterday! :-)
Liking everyone's baby's pics on instagram! Awe ^_^
Thanks Jack. look forward to watching
Yes!! Me too! All the hard work paid off!!
Wow this bus driver is amazing! Shall I marry her? Lol she is giving away gifts and wants to take us to Brazil...
Just about to leave for #Context. Ah, the convenience of in-town cons. See you there?
the only reason people dress up for halloween is to look "sexy". *eye roll.* get over yourself.
hey love :)
Apparently to some people...getting nothing is better than getting something and having to give some of it back.
RE: Aoki's name of course...sorry for the cryptic tweet
FREE FREE FREE WEBSITES LET US HELP YOU GROW YOUR BUSINESS LET US HELP YOU GET MORE CUSTOMERS DON'T WORK HARDER WORK SMARTER studio5one2
Coupons for buget cars rental
Sure! Let us know what you need. :)
Man I miss my San Diego family. I am gonna go there as soon as school is out.
Temporarily blocked from FB again. I posted a picture of a bicycle seat that had a dildo attached. Someone was offended and reported it.
Be of good cheer, the One who sent you into a storm will keep you in that storm, and in your darkest hour will come to you walking on it!
Re: snow showers MT : It happend twice in a span of an hour. Each time it lasted 5-10 minutes. Sunny skies now
Lol it b my co-workers! We need to go to el tequila. do too! Girlz time!
Vegan donuts! I just one. Wow are they good!
“: Fml kill me now.” <~ No, we need our fans to be alive!!
you had a dream you were in world of warcraft? What a nerd
I agree! I can't believe this stuff hasn't gone mainstream yet, very intriguing
Hi Oluwatoyin, you can support The Nature Conservancy this holiday season by using the pungle.me app!
If you're happy and you know it clap your hands.
He doesn't just put any old words that rhyme in his songs. He takes his time and writes incredible lyrics that have stories behind them
Then they asked if they could have a bite. Rofl
- Text me?
Our pleasure! Have a fantastic day and #tweet4assistance if you need any help or have any ?s :)
Be yourself because everyone else is taken.
We've heard it's COLD! RT : To my NY folks... How's the weather over there? I'll be in your city tomorrow
Today there is one minute more of daylight than darkness. It's a good start.
make up is ruined
Thanks for sharing, Ross!
Where did you find this information? I'm curious to read more about it.
Don't let your fears keep you from living...love
Resistance Training Reduces Signs of Parkinson's - Medscape
No murders or suicides in Detroit last night, none in Wayne county at all, makes for a better day at work!
Also, can we just have Tyrion slap Joffrey in every episode?
If love is the most treasured thing in the universe then why are so many people scared of it ?
is she not there... I will kill her if she overslept
Lmfao.. Why would you do that 😂😂
lets do it.
writing formulas for a giant excel-based dataset.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE SHOW: 10am-2pm, Sunday, August 22, Millennium Plaza Park, Lake Oswego (via )
Who really advocates choice for women? Conservative Repubs-to choose total liberty or Liberal Dems-to choose being bound by regulation
So sad with the 2 pm lunchtime at Robeson. That's affecting the students' ability to learn. Please tweetpossible follow-up.
I've depended on numerous hosting services over the years. None as horribly incompetent as Heed my warning...
#sow #hick where ya at?
Tell us your idea about the #power of conversation.
Its time for "Pink the Rink" at #Fredonia State University! Lets go BlueDevils!
IN THE AIR THE MIXTAPE DROPPING SEPT. 1ST
I don't need this fucking world, this world brings me down.
I know and so was I...
do jellyfish scars ever go away? My leg looks like it was in a knife fight...... :(
#Power Plate Sessions with Louis. Your first one is Free 786.287.8487. Mentioned you heard about it on
#thingsishouldsaynoto: my pillow cuz I really gotta do this paper
Good call. I'm sure they have it. lol!
Going boating then state fair :) what a fun weekend, break from work :)
At a packed house party we're going to perform tonight. is performing right now. Al's got crazy eyes at the right moment
Thanks for the #ff s/o!
the usual is going down tonight..skating with the bestfriends🎶😜
Don't forget that MYC prayer is in room 6 today! 10AM
:O Oh no! Best of luck on whatever you are doing next. Thanks for helping me meet folks in Yahoo! London.
Vinny Zollo trying to punch his ticket for the dance tomorrow night
I'm All Bored N Shit .
i can goo
Oh.. Napa Hour... A wonderful way to end the work week and bring in the Weekend!
That's just a part of animal rescue. You have to be able to roll with the punches.
#nce11 Conn. Supt: November presentation reframed my thinking on how we use tech. We need to change conversation
RT : If I can't be with Craig Gentry forever and ever, then I don't want to be with anyone else!
Ain't no Hater ova here .... Great game #OKC Congrads on game 1 win #NBA .... U know how it goes if U play poorly ya get blown out
very true. But that makes me even more nervous :)
Eating a cookie in bed, watching the clouds go by. Sunday, I'm in love with you.
Celebrate New Years Eve with Robbie Laws at Beaterville!
lol so funny... I feel like that's something we'd see in
I am feeling a little stressed out. :/
we'll see what kind of beat down delivers tomorrow. My other trainer has a softer side for rest days
I WANT to LIVE in a WORLD where DOPHINS get BULLIED. Touché dolphins touché.
one love BD
Shout out to for his remake of 'NSYNC's Girlfriend video. The Boyfriend video looks exactly the same.
Way to go #Rangers coming up big in the 11th
Just "Liked" Planet Earth on FB. As of this moment, 630 people have checked in. Who knew Planet Earth was so popular?
OMG, Marion Cotillard's white dress with the red trim in Midnight in Paris - gorgeous like her.
Hello, my dear !
this one guys girl friend
2da few singers out there who think they come close 2 my 6+Octave E1-G7 range.Theory training&Be able2sing instead of just hitting all notes
Here comes Sipp, there goes the game.
if you wantt
thank you(: ♥
#WeLoveUandUrDaughter everything will be alright! Lizzie is in My Prayers :) <3
What show are you most excited for this season???
I love it! Making it into my doc design class into the spring.
haha ya it's good stuff
Just because you put a pretty top over a muffin top don't make it a cupcake sweetheart!
my rap name is "Mad Chatter"
The application my son brought home for First Graduate says in 1 spot "shared goal of collage graduation". So they do arts/crafts?
Haha, State Farm Bobby Knight discount double-check commercial is pretty good! He's no , but still funny!
Finally read MY BEST FRIEND today. Loved it! Thanks for the rec. It's on my next Follett order.
Hey - I have openings Tuesday, 11/1, from 8:30-9:30am and 11am - 1pm. If anyone is interested in coming for a workout it's on the house!...
. There is something wrong with that timer, as soon as I change a diaper, he needs to be changed again. :-)
Tell me why alaya nd kalil are burried in the play pen full of toys.... lil badd ass kids
Hahahahaa he is stupid
lmfao!!! That's really funny, its so awful xD I love making fun of myself now.
join da party Kodak
Later on. Who ova deaa' ?
Tonight: Denver Chamber's BAH, Ohio Center for Broadcasting, 404 S. Upham Street, Lakewood 80226 5:30-7:30 I might take your picture :-)
That's funny...I just "cleaned" mine out this week, making an effort to stay on top of it and informed!
Dorito taco to end off the night great (: now just waiting for that txt!
Okay Thanks :)
Just downloaded new book on Hard to use the site, but I now feel like a sparkly, sweet, media princess.
I saw Brian Posehn & Boon Shaka-laka on the same corner of Cahuenga at the same time! It's a star studded nite out here!
Hearing a voice outside in the middle of the night counting down can be disconcerting. As far as I can tell nothing happened at 0!
Saying hello to the readers from Greece...:)
We always call homeruns & if your wrong you have to buy beer. Last year I was right on my only try, that was GoGo in game 162
Wtf like really?
Legal Tip for the day: Exceptions to the automatic stay of bankruptcy: child support, criminal proceedings, and divorce proceedings.
just got done eatting pancakes & smoke sausage!
Eminem kills you in any freestyle, any album, and any written lyric, you have no talent dude, go do drumline 2!
I liked MS&S, but it's probably going to b more theoretical & less connected to events in your daily life than sociology of work.
LOOKING FOR MISERY
do you do roof billboards in Dulles flight path ?
Megan passters just had sex with a girl from kentucky...she is a lez..only in 8th grade
#evernoticed how great sex is when your having it with someone you truly LOVE
;) love ya buddy
Never go to a doctor whose office plants have died.
hopes heart is in Seattle and I know if we had a team here you'd be Seattle all the way! Hope all is well fam?
what happened????
Looking mean! Beat Bisping's face in.
I miss my lil boo thing
Great first hour ... thanks for making it happen! Lots more to come right after the news. Stay tuned!
Its a signed poster and an EXCLUSIVE pic!
Exclusive Lego R2-D2 Is the Lego Set You Must Get This Year [Video] - null
hahah can we remix that song
thanks,you as well ;-)
it's about 3:35 here on the west coast haha and thank you! You too
Manning hits a fly to medium center. Kingery has it, the throw home and Sveum is SAFE! Braggs moves to 3rd, #Brewers lead 5-4!
Patience is a virtue? Working hard to be virtuous.
Thanks for the love!
We're all still alive, guys! We're preparing you some new material! So keep your ears open!
Through the locks without problems
u an alum too? One follow coming up lol
Thanks for the follow! Got any good food news for me?
The internet will help u to an extent. U still have to work ur singles.. hit the road, work it in different cities and b humble
lmao he really changed it to Dont forget the comma
Oh honey, my hat is off to you if that is the case. Gone with your bad self.
#Heat better fuckin' ball tonight..
you can :) part of really believing you can comes from trying, failing, but persevering <3
thanks I will have to show you the original I'm iffy
9 straight Ks at the beginning of a game & 4 straight BBs to end it? Now *that* is original.
that's quite the stat! :p
it isn't but you put your entire sex life all over twitter for everyone to read. Stating my opinion. That's all.
Not a word choice issue either. Just a bad opinion issue.
-cool. Enjoy your weekend :-)
I HATE when people try to make you the bad guy ; the villain for being honest I'm not gonna let people do that to me anymore
Well shake it shake it shake it baby now! Nothing like waking up to the almighty Beatles!
Hiya pal!
follow me
I love being let down by my sports teams. #Orioles #Ravens #Caps the last two just can't get the job done in the playoffs.
This Is It! The last time 2 support EJ during the Spring Drive. & I will bdoing the "This Is It" dance starting @ 8pm ET.
Yes! See you SAT 8-12pm RT : We are excited for the new Saturday morning Farmers Market at #TheAutry at #GriffithPark - awesome!
In 12 hrs I will be out of school lol
They should really put the wonky wheel shopping carts out of their misery.
And that's the difference between the whiskey and you
who doesnt eat there cake with a fork...? I sure do!(:
Thanks so much, Ann! Happy Easter to you as well. Enjoy your weekend,
Rumors swirling that WAR HORSE may be looking to move to a different theatre to make room for a revival of THE KING & I with Kelli O'Hara.
Just got in line for the Exterminator... We're here early & the line is still a little long!!!
That awkward moment when you can always find the opposite gender's bathroom faster than your own..
Damn, I need to get some religious scam going
Hello world, I'm home.
TF I look like wearing some Tom's
Can someone explain to me why everyone is going on about how Cody is single or not???
my little sister will be 3 in October (;
Yes penalty!
yea you did
I think without make up , you still bad as hell 🎶
im sick :(
It's so funny watching my boss trying to figure out how to use the copy machine lol
You are so welcome! We had a great time and it was nice to breathe in some fresh mountain air. Thanks again. :)
On my way to enjoying the finer things in life.
S/O That's My Better Half..!!* #Real Talk#
#FF App of the Day devs for the week - thanks everyone, and have a great Christmas!
ok bye. But were do u live.?
I'm so confused.
#Brides and #Grooms to-be! helps you bring together photos, videos, and updates from your wedding all in one space
We've got DJ Beach tonight. April starts at midnight, start it off right
Just wanted to say whats up, and Keep it going with Massive, its an awesome Party
A van-load from + from heading out to for higher ed social media workshop #hashtaganyone?
I guess this library card is only good thing I have. So I can still get on this computer. Watch out if I have get back on my feet.
Thanks for the kind words!
looks good.
Just made lunch reservations for my team @ 360 Uno Pizza -- it is always nice to get the team out for lunch off-site.
KETTLE 1'S AND SPRITE S/O TO DRE PABON
I have armyworms eating my mint. Every time I think I have them all picked off I find more frass and another caterpillar.
If you are interested in the business side of sports, follow , and Good stuff.
Ah, Super Bowl Wkend. Hope the game is good, halftime show is engaging, the ads outrageous and Glee is over the top
thanks for getting your tan on with us! Hope you're enjoying the long weekend!
Paille with the gooooaaaallll!!! #Bruins tie it 2-2. This 2nd period is becoming a shoot out.
JLo is that your....?
his 3 picks . He's awful. The d will Will this game for them if they hold on....that's my peace.
Rick Santorum isn't a practicing Catholic -- he's perfected it.
Court this morning lord I pray
totals ! & i SO called that sofa :)
Yes, When we post the AFC South...
Is the KCBS FM band 106.9? All I got over the weekend was Hip-Hop from 106.1 in SF.
lmfaooo snatched the damn bobby pin right out of my hair then still smacked me! #rude haha
Is it obsessive if I have over 40 posters of or am I a real belieber
*mumble ": I ramble sometimes :/"
I have no idea might just chilln in da crib and watch movies and eat ice cream idk
That is lesson learned from carter's mistake of not doing the same after the fall of the Shah of Iran. Iran now exports terrorism.
New news coming tomorrow!
go on fb
Stop by the Greater Madison Chamber of Commerce Business Expo Hospitality booth next week Tuesday and tell me about your business.
PLEASE! Anybody but that asshole Calvin Borel.
we're around the corner from you!
Congrats to everyone! This is a fantastic panel.
Thank you for supporting. Glad you had a great time!
just send it to me through YouTube or in message here
1830s Boston is a microcosm of US politics. Spend $ to support business, seek foreign loans and add to debt, blame social programs for debt.
Happy Saturday! Visiting with family and enjoying the weekend. Anyone have any big plans?
eww yeah. My cats yaks too, worst is when I walk in it. Ugh f'in cat!!
I'm Tryna get on the train next
Lately, I've been watching France24, the rest I get here.
Good Clean Puddy Cat>>>>>>
#DTHR getting the scoop - > will be in the house on Sunday
": I'm still waiting for the "Once you go black, you never go back" episode on Mythbusters." Bahahahaha
- Likewise! Love your quartet name. Would love to see you perform sometime!
I hate people who just get their stuff handed to them.
The saddest people always seem to be the nicest.
I am potato, to be are fruitcake?
RT : For Lent, I'm giving up not drinking this. — Drinking a Nugget Nectar by : just picked up a 6 pack of this today!
Enjoying a beautiful, crisp winter day in the Heartland! It is sunny, breezy and the view from my window is like a winter postcard!
Stay with it, though :-)
PickUpLine: Do you know what part of the tongue registers the salty taste? Would you like to experiment and find out.
**www.myspace.com/bekabronkmusic recorded at Curb Studios in Nashville, TN! **
#quotes The successful person makes a habit of doing what the failing person doesn't like to do.
Keep your eyes to the skies in DC, MD, and MD! #SpotTheShuttle and be a part of history.
am not just meant to survive, but to thrive! and that I shall do! New music on the way!
She Told Me Go Bacc 2 Tha Old Wayz I Told HER o No
do too, where all dat come from, n whose yall?
Thank you for the follow! We are following back too! :)
thanks bro !!!
Hi Sean, this is the CTG Education department Twitter! Nice to tweet-meet you! Victor works for us & says hi!
thank you
“Success is liking yourself, liking what you do, and liking how you do it.” Maya Angelou
No, I meant for the human. Is putting them on the cat "a pain", not painful. ;)
she'la miss u!!! Let's hoops soon
bold statement, sir. And possibly true.
The latest spammer, whose name is Lance, says he lives in Kuwait City. Someone's bored over at
Thank you so much! I haven't had a chance to watch it yet!
Get it MInzy!!!
that's the first I've heard of them! The album has lots of different sounds. That's still my favorite song
hahaha, you already know Big sis:-) Your heart is too big, thanks for checking on me:-)
Thanks for the mention!!
my order went through o.O
sorry! On broad now!
And the John lennon wall
RT : If you're on your laptop at , check out 's twitter background. I love it! Tweety Got Inspired.
They have multiple bars but they are really expensive. Best to just bring your own drinks in a flask or bottle.
And just in time!! #MARSunplugged! :)
i need my laptop soon, i wanna. use via web! i think id be addicted :3
I agree. I don't have it either. Somehow it seems like these people believe she performs miracles instead of The Almighty!
I think #MKEFirkin is a great idea for your next #beerclub event! Lots of great stuff for beer connoisseurs.
excellent decision my friend!
if UK wins tomorrow Tenn. is #2 SEC. What about Vandy , Fla. ?
I should have called it an "events calendar" though some regional incident data collection would be way cooler.
. insists that several high & mighty people have declared the term "cock-a-hoop" not indecent! Do I have a new fav word? Yes!
true that! good old u.s of A
ohh that's good Hurley! I've had other pals do hydrotherapy.
I listened to a couple of your songs on The Country Network and fell in love with your music. You're amazing.! I love you.!
Jazz concert in our Rotunda starts in one hour! UCLA music students will perform pieces by a variety of jazz legends. See you there.
So , Ariana,peoples laugh at me becaude my skin color please support me.<3
thanks! Our android version is coming near the end of May. Stay tuned through our updates on tapcongress.us and see the site.
Forget Facebook ads. Focus on good, helpful and useful content and update your blog frequently.
i hate that i take a nap than i can't sleep
Damn life so short...fuck it I don't wanna go to court
Coming from a performer/teacher POV, teachers dont get enough credit..next time I hear 'those who can't, teach' BS I may cause a scene...:P
Any negative behaviour a dog does will get worse if he gets told off for doing so
RT : #celebrates GIRLFRIENDS' GETAWAY #afterparty | see you all tonight!
where do you work at?
envious about Mehldau. Hope he throws in a Radiohead or Hendrix cover for you
im back from mexico guys ugh so tired i see none of my friends were active enough to reply to me
Promote yourself, but do not demote another. Israel Salanter
Last Day for collecting March Madness Stickers!
retweeting like it's my JOB! Cause I basically say the same things every second of my life
A part of me wants to watch the second half of My Week with Marilyn, but another part of me keeps thinking about the bland first half. :/
yes!!! I'm going to send u the link so u can register. :)
Seeing The Kills tonight! I'm a lucky girl.
I really can't, but Tom should!
Your worth consists in what you are and not in what you have.
Pumpkin Porter is pouring at Fatso's - get some before it is all gone!
This is where the British girl quietly slips out of this convo :P
I was just complaining about this the other day. So tired of "Drop 2 sizes!!!!" articles.
- yes & energy efficient too! Welcome to check them out anytime!
LOSING AT HOME IS LIKE WATCHIN YOUR BITCH GET FUCKED IN YOUR OWN BED
?For many people, hell has already arrived
I am.doing good actually thanks.it was good and warm today here 78 #jealous? Haha
#IfWeWereTogetherRightnow I wouldn't get to chapter 4. This book isn't gonna read itself...
I really wanted it before and I had an opportunity to go to Strasberg, France-- beautiful! But you know how the cookie crumbles
its been almost 6 hours and i still feel like shit
david foster wallace?
I knoow who too!
Chris Rene got a cam on #XFactor he will pawn it for drugs.
When you sleep till almost 4, and you can't sleep that might <<
Playing finish that song at fantasmic..they play sweet Caroline. I definitely said go pitt instead of "so good"
May the 4th be with you! The library has Star Wars books, Star Wars movies, & John Williams music(!) ...all free with your library card.
My opinion better matter I have #freedomofspeech on my side, suckers!!
I miss u to Mikey! This is my last week of school then we can have bust sessions everyday!
I can proudly state,“I worked hard on the practice field, in the film room and at meetings” after all, football is my passion.
follow back :)
Design solves and surprises.
Thanks for the love!
Doug Fister would have been a Cy Young contender had he been in Detroit all year. 7-1 with a 1.79 era in 11 starts.
Haven't worked a Friday in months....don't like it.
Feels good to beat boston baby.
I really hate School... :(
we are exhausted, happy, joyous and tired. And we are taking a melatonin and hitting the rack. Looking forward to seeing you!
6-7 scoops of beans, water just below boiling, 4 minutes= perfect :)
Eveyone should stop everything and follow the March/Rally in Sanford,Fla. It could be your son, your nephew, it could by you,Black Man!
makin a spontaneous trip to u of I for Chiptole
i like your style
Gettin' ready to take my lady out to dinner for her birthday!!
Busted lip :'(
I'm not alone,i know that god is always with me
Still writing: Qualitative Case Study on the Engagement of African American Learners 2 Raise Achievement through Community-Based Initiatives
Joining ' xcllnt "Money Power & Wall St" Part 3 late thnx to v long day at
Free actor profile.
There's snow outside this airplane window. Can't remember the last time I saw it.
Air hockey with a 2 year old... And he's got game! That's quality right there!
The ‘Aquaponics Soldiers’ of Camp Aguinaldo
All I Gotta Say Is Im Definitely investing In One Of those Fitness Balls lol
I saw you at the AMA luncheon yesterday. Wasn't Tony's stunt funny? :)
#2000thTweet is dedicated to amazing people in my life. ! You guys rock!
late night tonight. You're welcome to stream it too. :)
alright ima get in the bed
sorry, we didn't. Got some Yards IPA.
Started morning trip to Denver by spilling coffee on 10 people around me. Not the most popular person on the plane! #coffeeinluggagebin= ...
what's with the drink on it video? Kinda weird! But love the song.
we love ya too beybii :)
I concede private lives indicate character, but wish we all focused on economy, foreign policy, policy understanding, insight, leadership.
Stop being selfish, make the eggs for the two kids, and forget about yourself, find something else!
Riley attacked private citizens--graduate students--who never offered themselves up for her critique. Walker, not so much.
Derek Lowe? Atlanta is paying him to win in Cleveland.
Enter Coupon Code: DRAFT for $4.00 off your delivery tonight. Minimum order= $30.00
#10ThingsILove Jesus, husband, my kids, family and friends, nature, songbirds, chocolate, photography, writing, learning
#NFAIS Key philosophy for Small Demons is to allow users to follow through. (i.e. Add all films mentioned in a book added to queue.)
You should eat makeup so your pretty on the fckin inside
I'm not a fan of remakes. But huge fan of Channing. *swoon*
Chuck Brown - Chuck Baby
no porq solo me vy a animar con vs
yo text me bro
The text I just sent >>> HAHAHA
John Crosby thanks Andrew Taylor Still for the gift of Osteopathy.
thank roomie!! We're on the brink of something great!!
“: 2 funerals in 2 days.....lesson learned never take life for granit” I hear ya buddy! Too many little ones are leaving to early
What is going on with all the flashing lights downtown state st at the inner loop?
Where the fuck is my grain belt?
LOL DUDE. PEOPLE ARE FREAKING OUT. Omg. This is too funny.
Thanks, friend!
Touché - RT So yeah ... was and is a success, I'm drunk eating a Philly cheese steak
Weddings and funerals are the hemorrhoids on the timeline of humanity.
Don't tase me bro.
ABSOLUTELY! RT If they're bringing the Cosmos back then #SportingKC needs an alternate 3rd kit Spurs Uniform
Big weekend, time to pack up and move!
We don't nd 2 disrespect women 2 criticize them. Now, Ann Coulter...well, u might convince me! :-)
certainly would be a validation of his leadership/policies. I just want a new arena. lol.
Not fishy at all! You mean, because it's an election year w/ lousy incumbent, and terrorism is red meat issue?!? Oh, you cynic, you!
Time for screens and short dump offs. RT : The coverage downfield by the Giants has been great.
N/p The One I loved back then. One of the best songs ever
Cheeto's = #awesome!
“That annoying feeling when you're dying to talk to someone, but you refuse to text them first.”
yes, not for another year
Happy birth day Chuck Berry!
Think your multivitamin is all good? Watch out for fillers. They are equivalent to the packing peanuts used for mailing
Tomorrow is going to be a coffee 24/7 study at Barnes and Noble kind of day.
out of town tonight, but can be around earlier tomorrow afternoon.
i really really wish there was for blackberry
(founder of Internet Archive) giving talk, "Universal Access to All Knowledge" via Skype at
Next time!! “: Very sad to announce Jack is not feeling well, and the family will not be able to attend the twins game tonight”
I would marry every guy in one direction 
That ice looked scared girl. I hope you were kind to it after you finished.
I'm going back to bed. It's too early to be up.
Meeting with Gwinnett Medical Center today. Discussing future plans for the Google Adwords marketing program. Program is producing results!
Your advice offered comfort and helped many times but I have not yet bought any of your materials
Hey Dennis! Trying to contact you regarding a Boot Camp opportunity. Can you please call me at ReelWorld...206-448-1518. Thx
-Seeing a couple and saying , "forget both of you , just because i'm single !" -___-'
*falls asleep with contacts on* *wakes up* *goes to take them off* *it feels like you're peeling off a layer of your actual eye* :(
It's 2:30 on Tuesday afternoon, what's your #energy boost "go to" in the middle of the day?
Cook County State's Attorney Anita Alvarez now speaking to the press. Said there was tremendous evidence. Happy with the verdict.
cutting all my hair after graduation. cant wait to donate it!
well i suppose that's a start. did you at least crack open the cover yet?
What little I have goes toward my commute. $4 gasoline.
crazy marked the bush on Michigan Ave NE. That camera has been here for years. Private property and defacing our home!
where should i get cupcakes in LA without driving all the way to sprinkles?
Nah, I just pull my quad muscle every time haha.
Forever on my fly shit
Lol yeah.. no worries, you missed nothing.
I may just decide to stay single longer.... mayb another yr
▒ Books worth Sharing ▒ FICTION ▒ The Codex file [Kindle Edition] by Miles Etherton Michael Robertson’s family has been murdered to...
Would also check domaintools.com
''Omg, I'M SO sAD CUZ I MET DA BOY'Z LYK 10 TYMES MUH MUM ISN'T LETING MEH GO TO MEET THEM." Um stfu calm your tits. I Never Met Them. -___-
thanks for following! 🌷
We are going to be mixing it the week of July 12th so it will be finished by the end of the month but i think we might wait
only 102 others? Sounds like a lousy game.
Chris: Knowledge of creating finding aids and delivering content through finding aids is increasingly more common
I'm happily single. - Paula Abdul
isn't it too early for a white lady with a sombrero to be making tequila cocktails?
Thanks for the RT! Get your votes in!
#nsn3DSaturday The movie was amazing! Going to see it again tomorrow! :)
congrats ! You've won the beauty kit from Johnson's!
#GirlHoeLyrics hey i just met you and this is crazy but heres my pussy eat it maybe;) lol
thank you for trying to get to the truth. The laws must protect all of our children.
Tomorrow night we're playing at Coupland Dancehall We will be playing before our buddy so get there early if you're in the area!
We offer bulk discounts so if you do choose to start your juniors on products call the office to purchase for best deal
South Dakota State is the first NCAA Division I school to extend a scholarship offer to Sussex Hamilton sophomore Brady Ellingson.
The moment I've been waiting for since I got to europe. Off to florence! I'm coming for you!
Thanks for the tweet. Let us know if you want a demo of the GoingOn platform.
Chris, what is the latest on Trust me, the guy is still in phenomenal shape.
You have 9 minutes to get to the premiere!
RT Craving Jiffy-Pop popcorn and don't know why.
Anyone know of a car repair class for women in SD???
Thank you for the follow. Hope you are having a great day!
I'm not getting into that with you.
dude. im sick now! my throat is killing me
music video called cheekies tho, I'm done with earth
I'm glad you came JK
breakfast of champions and partyproofing
followed love :)
For our shows at Long Wong's in April and The Rogue in May we will once again be giving away free Valley Metro goodies, so come on out!
Do you need to hire Business Development Directors? One of our customers just did (within 2 weeks!) with one of our phone-sourced names!
email me i would like to be on the show im in atlanta ga
just stayin busy fe, text me tho. I'll hit u back wen I can
I'm happy you made it home safely
On my way home, cause early release!!!
#Script is almost done!
Happy Earth Day! Go for a hike, jump in a lake, get outside today.
I swear auto correct! Lol I ment welcome(: it corrects it wrong!
“: That's what we want! ” How long are u on tonight?
you may want to send an adult to the #Bing party. These children are slizzerd and need help. It's like a #sxsw frat party.
Where is everyone today!? Did I miss a holiday?
Down time after expo.....sad it's over till 2013
wen u say where is my such such on here dat jus means where u at on here not dat ur mines crazy lol..... I was Twitter talkn
Things to do when you have lost your internet connection: Open the curtains to see if anything has changed over the past 2 years.
where black people even wear Aeropostale.
The quiet meditation of ideas - describing the act of reading. Love it!
First Date Impressions- First impressions are important make them count. Here are some tips-
At another fitting for Vampire Dairies. It was great to get an email asking if I was available for filming. Filming is on March 13 & 14.
Nice next week for cleaning windows?
Is it just me or are the magic hands trying to induce more rally. Guess the pros need to get shorts off. These indexes seem frozen
can't wait to taste your chili. Pretty tad name
Hope to see today!
Just filled up at costco for 3.63! Winning!
Oh my God I will got my wish, I found my camera. it got reinstall into my laptop again, Thank God. My B-Day will be perfect after all!
CCPE wishes all of our students a happy, healthy and safe holiday!
ooking forward to Latin Grammy winning Salsa Legend--Lalo Rodriguez!! At the Conga Room--Thursday, October 21!!
look at the stars. look how they shine for you, and everything that you do.
is seeking a Chicago TW for a short assignment, writing assembly instructions for furniture.
Ate one hot dog and two hamburgers
dude it ain't Mickey D's... it's "Macdos"
The 3 C's of life: choices, chances and changes ~ You must make a choice to take a chance or your life will never change.
get some pork belly and you'll feel 1000% better.
The quote: "Genius Is Only A Superior Power Of Seeing" by John Ruskin remind me that we all have unique ways of perceiving the world.
gonna need those barens b4 thursday...
Samsung iCloud Competitor Will Apparently Debut Alongside Galaxy S I - Gizmodo Australia
RG3 is the bomb.... He'll succeed!
Trying to get a hold of my mentor seems like we are both very busy. Motivated to reach the best I can.
Happy May! This means it's almost time for the #ACLFest lineup! Yay!
#SignsYouLostAFight the person your fighting starts taking your jewelry..lmao
Getting ready for the weekly luncheon with
I love you too!(;
at least we are all pretty on twitter
i miss
Felicia Day thinks our web series is funny and cute "This web series about dog walkers is pretty cute!" (Cut to dog=instant comedy lol)
Yoga time
7d on the way
Don't conservatives ever get tired of hating everyone? It must take tons of energy to hate women, gays, other religions, and other races.
North Carolina bans same-sex marriage. Next step? Bringing back slavery.
proud of my Team tonight!
Im in it in it till the finish and a mistress that is fine like.a.fucking parking ticket
with a true Bob Dole moment referring to himself in the third person.
Serving size is same. Only thing I can think of is the toffee coating adds so much volume that you get less in the serving.
it's a great photo!
$15.00 Booster Draft starting at 2:00pm! Then onwards to FNM! Hope to see everyone tonight! Have a great day!
Eminem obviously 💙
That OVO and that XO is everything I believe in, I know.
Headed to the Thirsty Armadillo in the Ft Worth STOCKYARDS tonight! Mike Stanley Band kicking the night off around 10:30!! Bring yer asses!
that's me on some psychic shit :)
Please RT "Social Problems" summer 1 is a great class- get done faster on a fun-filled, learning adventure!
Hey hey how are you
Leaving for a Big Party tonite! Fun!!!
denim on black.
happy brithday brandon
age is nothing but a number!!
For Event planners get your wristbands event and Custom Wristbands at NYC Printing 123. Custom Wristbands for events, parties and...
please follow me , I'm a fan of yours 
We're always thinking bout you.
Well I'm thinking is losing out on a whole lot of money because was sent home.
She's got a cat tattoo and her dress is blue.
This week: the kids are fighting for the right to load the dishwasher. Next week: they'll forget what a dishwasher even does.
What about your life savings?
the first 5 People to come into Joe's today ONLY & Mention this tweet will receive a #FREE Cheezy bread with ANY purchase.
Learn to run and effective two minute offense when its time to up the tempo
Saw a really cool doormat written in French. In France do they have cool doormats written in English?
I can give you tons more details if you'd like cause it's hard with twitter limiting each message to 140 characters haha
Well yeah, the whole team has... But he was in the MVP race last year.
Too bad for CSU, but now rooting for Murray St. I think they have shot to advance another rd. #CongratsCSURams for making it this far!
Send me your resume and contact info and I would be more than happy to discuss!
Be strong, my friends.
New Life Class watching Courageous at 5:00 pm today! #pizza time
“The devil is a better theologian than any of us and is a devil still.” -- A.W. Tozer
Thank you for promoting my sister and her book. She rocks!
Dualities never really agree...they just have a symbiotic relationship..nothing more...nothing less; hence Love and Lust. Peace!
like reptiles.
*Hackneyed statement* looks just right
Cinnamon raisin bread & green tea to cheer me up.
no one cares what happened ... shhhhhhuuutttuppppppp
Deep condition your hair before a color
What is with the "I complete you?" There is but one source of completion for people and that is the Lord above.
"What lies behind us and what lies before us are tiny matters compared to what lies within us."
forgot about Halloween socks yesterday (was wearing sandals), so I'm wearing them today
:) lol yea maybe that could possibly, most likely. Less likely. Or will happen. Hahaha. Till then. Time will tell
It's Going On Now... Stop By! Http//www.IncredibleNetworking.com
Tax Season Update 3/15. More in, less done. Am waiting for those pesky amended 1099s. Odd how last month it was just the opposite.
I respectfully disagree, but will save this argument for dueling whiskeys.
didn't even notice ! Haha maybe it's cuz ur super quiet
The emergent of 2 creators who contribute to a paper is 3rd "band" that is the combination of the 2 authors
Iwanna go see the vow :*
Interesting avatar by the way, as I don't recall you looking like an egg at all when I met you... Times change I guess...!
Hi Pam - thanks for following Better Wine Guide, now following you too! Always happy to meet a fellow Tuscan Texan!
Any Waffle Houses up your way?
ok I will
Read to a Dog from 3:30-4:30. A dog's 3 favorite things: walks, pets, being read to by you! Bacon is probably in there somewhere, too.
Y'all would see I'm smiling
Yeah Betty!
LOL I know
CBS Chicago has chosen to our event up on their site. This thing is for real. So is your calendar. 26 more days, friends.
im listening! #Saysomethin!
- yeah, GPL not compat with AppStore - the Droid app had to be rewritten from ground* up in java #moodle *(pi:-)
boutta go over GM house
Forecast for Wednesday Night: Mostly clear in the evening then low clouds and fog. Lows 55 to 60.
Hahahaha it might as well be called that.
#mad social vs
This House floor debate on repealing a cost-control board in health reform law is heating up. Upton vs. Waxman in round 1.
thanks for the retweet. I hope someday soon we get to meet in person!
follow me?
#noidata viz1: conditional formatting, bar graph, line graph, scatterplot (for continuous values, not for time), pie chart, stacked bars
“: I LOVE YOU haha” awe so sweet!!!!! Follow mee and i will scream and video it and send it to you ;) jk
even out of character do you ever find yourself saying Bayyybe like Gunther? lol
Seeing as how you've got such a sexy body I don't think anyones going to mind at all Bunny! Wowsers!
okay you went a little too far now x)
and now one #Singoff retweet for Sara Bareilles too! “: Aw, man. Our little show needs some love. :( #SAVETHESINGOFF”
he's getting 13 punches from me already :D
Let's have an NL Cy Young to go with that AL award.
she's wanted to make cookies for weeks.
Yay! I don't have jury duty tomorrow!
somebody will be out of a job tonight
Welcome to The ABP Expo! "Education is simply the soul of a society as it passes from 1 generation 2 another." G. K. Chesterson
they ae probably whole grain! :P
i took you by the hand, and we stood tall.<3
- 30 minutes into the concert & I damn near passed out. Taken during the Mikwaukee show on 8/14/11.
So true! RT : Klout is so bogus ... you go on vacation & your score drops 20 PTS ... Really?
What's the other game in the Final Four?
THANK GOD IT'S FRIDAY!!!
“: Some people are so poor, all they have is money..”
Well hell yeah I miss my dime piece BIDDIES
“For God so loved the world, that He gave His only Son, that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have eternal life." John 3:16
Homophobia is wrong... homosexuality is wrong... Lets start quoting bible.
Korean Running Sex Ring Nabbed
keep it popping in here
Those little phone calls mean so much <3
But HAPPY THANKSGIVING to everyone! I'm thankful for all my friends and family for sure. Excited to head to NYC very soon from Philly!
what if the pbl lesson is driven by sudent interests. The "p" in pbl can mean both project and passion
Hitting the road today & tour with Seven Day Sonnet starts tomorrow!! This is what we love! See you all out there!
oh... I thought you meant the corner ;)
Sometimes I just want to go somewhere where nobody knows my name .
President Obama's support for gay marriage is another example of how the Democratic Party is the party fighting for civil rights and freedom
Rt “ I don't "act black" enough for the black ppl and I'm "too black" for the white ones #storyofmylife”
Vroom, vroom! We’re giving away a Ducati Monster 626 at next week. Stop by booth #1117 to enter!
at least you are inside because it is so hot and muggy out. Have a good trip.
He is one of my heroes! When he popped up in The Conspirator, I screamed in the theatre!
why ridiculous??
Ewwww. School tomorrow!
haha - you really don't get it, do you?
yeah that grey can go with blue or red elites. And yeah the 4 are coming out in military blue fire red and black
I love working for ChaCha!!!
Wow, that was impressive, 108 yards... an NFL record!
So anxious to watch true blood 2nite and the dvr is set 2 record the vma's.
Loving this second half...KSU @ MU ..what a game.
In case u were wondering, I'm making it to my first summer class on time! 👍
Yay! It's our 1 YEAR ANNIVERSARY!!!! Let's make this year amazing!
that song is terrible, just terrible.
chillin' w/ da bestie and we #summertimefine!!! let summer keep on rolling!!!!
Deeply appreciated. Will do, sir. Likewise! ;) - the troublemakers
Well, welcome to Indy, Mr. Luck!
this weekend love?
are you going to the concert with us?
Anyone else tired of the rain yet? 😒
I couldn't agree more
re: children's blogs: cecilia hogan ethics checklist: it it public? accurate? respectful? imp to cultivation? imp to secure gift?
DID HE GET A TICKET?!
who is everybody?? your other hoes??
I just tried to join a group and was told I had reached the maximum # of groups joined. I didn't realize that there was a limit. Has anyone…
we are in Stealth mode for now but will let you know when we have a beta you can explore.
Goodmorning world! Hope everyone has a good day today!
best show ever!
Happy Veterans Day & thanks to those that served for my freedom.. We live in the greatest country!!
Serves to remind you. Injuries happen at anytime. The likelihood of Rose getting hurt didn't go up in the last minute beyond the first one.
My bed at home >>>
Today has gotten more awesome with each hour. Dictionary went live, found an amazing haul of beachglass, warm weather & now Sarpino's 'za!
... Not creepy enough.
Happy Sunday all. Boot camp starts again today.... Yikes!!!
the profile pic is perfect!
"back" for second semester of grad school all the way from Sin City!
"Mean To Me" sounds so good on the radio right now! Come back and visit us soon!
Your income is largely determined by the demand for the thing you provide whether it's a product or a service.
Meeting today with Terry Alford of the Office of Cancer Health Disparities Research (OCHDR). (More...)
woah!! I didn't know anyone else listened to or even knew Dave Malillo
Im sorry I cant be as pretty as those other heartless girls
I mark out at it too.
Yep. ACL Startup party is on the list for today. See you there.
nope, he didn't apologize, didn't say anything. at least he didn't do anything too foolish, either
omg I'm in love! you just introduced me to my new favorite song...<3
we have so many #jonasFansProblems haha
The fight we had last night was my fault, my wife asked me what was on the TV and i said dust.
3 innings and 9 Ks not for Kershaw or Halladay or Verlander or King Felix, but Aaron Harang. And that's why we live baseball.
well good luck cuz I am still sticks on Maths.
08/16/2011 - Networking/Business Development Committee Speaker: Victor Varma, InsureUs Topic: Networking Like a Pro
follow me, i follow back(:
Acting and Spoken Word is popping, but I promise new music soon!
Thank you for the FF!
Are you coming to #Northtoberfest?
I just snagged an ARC of this year's edition - Alice, post-high school! Ah!!!
Everyone eventually leaves, willingly it unwillingly.
wait dissing who??
Done with work! Time to go hit up my favorite local spot! What are you doing tonight?
because im too lazy to get an ice pack for my knee i put my super cold water bottle under my knee... #FeelsGood #Lazy!
Now you're just somebody that I used to know.
i burnt my head with my hot curlers :-(
One of my coworkers does that cleanse--daily--and looks like Brad Pitt in Thelma & Louise. So frigging unfair...
Being true to God less about cautiously avoiding sin than about courageously & actively doing God's will. Dietrich Bonhoeffer
max & caroline meeting martha stewart in person.
RT : The universe is an expression of the Mind of God, imbued with the intention that all beings self-actualize. We can...
LOVE it!
Everyone has that one friend, who is perverted, you can say Anything and somehow they relate it to sex
I don't know of this is just me but I think Asian people are the most beautiful people in the world, seriously they are born and die sexy!
Gumer's 12 days of Christmas starts Monday! What are you looking forward to seeing?
.: Ever since learning how smell works, I can't help but think about all the poop molecules touching my brain.
Those who bring sunshine to the lives of others cannot keep it from themselves." James Barrie
well OK best short film, even michael bay could probably only stretch that to a half hour
hey chica :) hope you're going home to IL for xmas bc that's where I sent your card! miss you.
#Twins have more runs tonight than they have wins this season. Not a stat you'd want to brag about.
My boy should be a true nigga and hook a brother up with some food
Totally late, but check out my niece 's sweet tat! Oh, you young'ns who give me hope for the future.
Came home to find our first wedding registry gift waiting for me! Not a bad suprise
42 days until Orlando.
Is that the app you recommend? I've been using PDF-Notes which is fine but nothing special.
I'm mean to repeat wrong numbers too :o)
To be honest I started to fangirl about #SaySomethin at 7 and I still am <3
It's going to be all about taking care of mum today <3
Rosemarie. Are you poking fun at Haley. U MOFO BULLY.
"RT : free tickets because I talk about still life like I work there.. Plus I'll Breakdance to set the mood right. "
About to make my first screencast for a client. Can't believe I've never thought of this before.
Happy Thursday! :)
So true! I am a Scorpio (DOB: 10/23/62) and that's the essence of my character...
I wish I knew how to make barbecue or teriyaki chicken. Where's is Mom when you need her? lol
just how it goes sometimes... ;)
what did we win?
I had Lucy last night. U r talkin bout the tranny hooker on Vine right?RT : Having my 1st Lucy's experience w/
Tell me by whom you are eaten, and I shall tell you what you will be.
I want to be in the Need For Speed movie. I have driven a Ford lately. Chevy is the King of the road. I've put it in D also.
RT : Canadian govt cuts to Stats Can, libraries & archives show they want to eliminate facts in policymaking, whether for or against
"Stewardesses" is the longest word that is typed with only the left hand.
Hello, Friday. Good to see you again.
im sick. Ill be okay. so rest will do me good
good point
My comment:- “we often say that ‘money’ is not everything but the fact is that there is nothing without ‘money’
#Angry. : WHAT TYPE OF SUPPOSE TO BE FANS ARE YOU?"
Michigan doc arrested for prescribing 5M doses of narcotics, $5.7M Medicare fraud.
i cant wait till step up 4 comes out!! how many times do you come out :)
Come on Caron!!
when?! AH it's going to be tough for me because I work all weekend and exams are next week :( then the week after that I
you need to start tweeting some more lol
the developer king of Bacardi mucho love 💗💗
Oh yeah, it's a complete waste of money... Until you win $640 million! Haha
Google Analytics Social Reports Get Backlink URLs, Post Titles
Didn't someone write a post on momentum a little while ago?
Tired about to try to go to sleep, after iGet his phone call
R#pink if you care!
yeah. me too.
Just saw somebody try to hail a bus
Have you checked out our massage therapist yet??? What's keeping you? Heaven knows you have no stress, right?
what do u mean? please say more...
There's alotta girls on this bed
Well it's Haha I was being stupid and forgot to switch accounts. Lolol & nm, you? :) xx
im scarying myself..i dont get why i do this..
The notes never got down to Jackson and Barnett
yea but if u cut yes then I'll cut mine! ;)
Show your mama some love with our Mother's Day Gift Card Bonus!!! Get 15% more back on your card!
Yes, I'm delayed too. Ugh! Looks like I'll be hanging out at K4 for another couple of hours...Good luck getting home!!
Hopeful is good. We are, too! Can we get a 'heck, yeah!' for some economic boom times already?!!?!?
You were so clutch down the stretch in OT. Never a doubt. Good luck on Tuesday!
Nope, Talking Heads. Final answer.
flashblock in chrome no longer blocking autoplay of youtube videos on youtube. what happened?
Havent been on tumblr in a min
LOL. LET'S TREND ' Chris Brown is a Rusher ' !!!
HAPPY BIRTHDAY <3
I think i'll step out tonite after school! I deserve it!
I love my bicycle. I don't think I tell it enough.
Why thank you! Hope you found the examples useful - I know I need them on a slow day!
Nice!!! I should do the same RT I have decided that today will be my Friday😊
Colds suck. #goaway 😷
Just bought some sand and bricks at Home Depot - Now, that is some major "Manly" stuff right there. Wait, bought some flowers too. Dammit.
We had a great time at #suserviceday earlier today!
This hazelnut coffee is brightening up my monday morning! ☀☀☕
Don your Phidippides gear & come cheer with us from the tent at mile 18 of the Atlanta Marathon this Sunday!
The pattern for Babe Ruth's bat is listed as "template #R43" in the Louisville Slugger's archives.
Made it to #socialbashORL... Lots of great people here like
DailyHookahTip#103: When using 2 hoses, if there's no built in one-way valve, the person not inhaling should plug the hose.
Nearly 200,000 visits to website yesterday! Keep staying connected and talking up #indy!
Congratulations Tiger! Clearing the past and making your comeback!
If you are over age 10 and your sneakers still have lights in them, you need a reality check.
now you tell us!
Marion Barber is doing God's work.
my moma just said that if she saw me crying for a guy shed slapp me and say 'i taught you better than that'...honesltyy i agree with her
Got to talk at the Graduate Methods session of #thatcampva, yay! Now, lunching and dork shorts (not an article of clothing)!
I wish I knew who that was! Haha
learning about polling at a conference. i want to stand up and scream "LIBRARIANS HAVE BEEN DOING THIS FOR YEARS"
Roger Waters: The Wall Live VIP Package sales will close 3 weeks prior to show! Exclusive VIP Party & VIP Tour Packages still available...
Oh, geez... maybe I was. I didn't open it.
Call me and Artist, because I draw attention.
It's the last day of #IRA2012!! What is your favorite memory of the convention? Share it with us!
Im in a deep depression state right now...please leave me alone..wouldn't be on deviantart for a while..
Anyone need a néw follower I'm here for ya F4F Q&A ask me anything.6
I never got the question ;(. Talk to me goose!!!
My pancakes are better, but there's no tequila at IHoP.
#IFYOULOVEME u won't be a jerk
This year I'm thankful that the best WRs in the country play for Arkansas
Please tweet your followers to follow me and spread the word about my services. Thanks in advance.
Thank you!
Wrong place at the wrong time.
>>>New Avi is really nice :)
People often say that motivation doesn't last. Well, neither does bathing- that's why we recommend it daily.
Hope this is true. Dave Van Ronk is one of my musical heroes!
How was the chili cook off for #LLS ? I was sad to miss it. Did you win?
Gonna try online dating. Profile status- "Sticks & stones may break my bones but whips & chains excite me." Prob get real winners w/that.
Alpha Chi Omega installed Zeta Theta chapter at May 5, 1975. Happy Founders Day !
hey justin today is my birthday, can you please tweet me?
I gotta say, is definitely in it to win it.
are you done being mean?
Don't be a hater RT lol can i ask why this sounds like a novel idea to you?
Thanks for joining us!
I was in VA last week & the mountains are so colorful with foliage, the #wine was as crisp & remarkable as the #scenery!
Allison is in labor...baby Claire will be here soon!
I'm not sure what you mean, I shoot Canon (5D) and as long as you have the Composer for Canon mount, both optics work with it.
you have no idea how happy I am you followed me. I need this more than ever!
that particular one did because I had an error so I re-sent it. Usually only once- I use Reverbnation to post all.
thanks Eden! Love you! Tell your mommy I'm unhappy with her :) jk!
Wana puta stripper pole in my room
still remember that day
nothing yet. As soon as I know ...
Lovely story about RAF pilots buzzing sunbathers! RT : Cool!! Great way to spend the day :)
I'm funny
Cleared to run.
Thanks for tweeting!
Is there fun syracuse stuff I can just crash?
At the Cardinals game with the kids and the parents. :-)
thanks for listening homie!
y cause u ain't. Lol
oh you fancy huh lmao
Thank you for the follow!
same to u girl, hope u enjoy this next move!
Iona blowing the 25 point lead in their play-in game
hah. it's scenic. that's about it.
I Loved You, I Love You & I Will Love You.
bruised bone,pulled ligaments&I broke blood vessels so I have blood leaking in my hip😰No gym for rest of the year!
RT : for the Signature event & I am readying my brain for the download! Great content & terrific speakers- 96°!
Love it! Gleaning insights w/ impact from data. RT : Professional potential indicator of effective sales person at Swarovski
I never got that text.
Seems like I always had crushes on chicks I couldn't have. And then I end up fucking with someone I shouldn't have....
HEY I JUST MET YOU & THIS IS CRAZY SO HERE'S MY # SO CALL ME MAYBE?!?! [; lol.
Every time you are tempted to react in the same old way ask if you want to be a prisoner of the past or a pioneerof the future ~DeepakChopra
you're right about that! Love that place.
Who has a snow day today?!
Hughes&#039; struggles cap troubling day for Yanks - Error
contingency plan if IJ inexplicably doesn't get picked up?
Shear Da Beard!! ha ha We hope you had a great time! Thanks again for using ShowClix :)
Thank you! ": Congratulations and beat wishes to and on their wedding today!!"
Danish restaurant ranked world's best for 3rd year
I deserve it?! Well thanks aha. Omg dude you're just making me blush. I look like a tomato right now..
the last episode of EHM was good, but its a degraded version of its first season already...
yeah they r awesome
As always, thanks for the RTs! :)
you guys were amazing tonight! And you guys are so sweet:)thanks for coming out after the show & saying hi & taking pictures
Hey gorgeous lady, where you planning on attending Miss USA in vegas jun 3rd at all? I am dieing to go!! <3
Okay sorry guys but we have to report that Build Day is canceled and we will not have a Build Day this Saturday.
Yes they do! :) RT #BGSD knows where to hire the best interns, don't they?
Just a few days now until we will be serving our "Hill City Hots" from our enclosed food trailer...I'm saving your favorite Dog for you !
lol Ugggggggggggghhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh I bored and I dht have a boo
haha.. just sayin..big game tomorrow.. catch those z's and eat your wheaties in the mornin! Gotta beat up Butler
#FF do-over (and a merry happy birthday) to !
We have to understand that we have to take the initiative if we want things changed. That's the game, so stop riding the bench!
it's all good :) just wanted to say hi since you said nobody was
We Miss You Selena.
Arrived in Warsaw mid-day, rainy and cold. Spent the day learning about the Musuem of the History of the Jews of Poland. Wonderful day.
it was refreshing not having it rain or be cold. Everyone seemed happier because of that :0)
beba, you inspire me. I hope my kids are as well behaved and smart as yours
I can't think of anything cool to ask you...
*snort* RT Happy 65th birthday too
exactly lol but it made me laugh
Someone is seriously playing titanic music right outside my hotel room. At 11:45. While I'm trying to sleep. K thanks.
T-2 is saying "You're the best Mom ever and don't you forget it !" lol ;-)
Yolo ; that's the motto , #gtfo you quote everything #drake says . it just means your a follower #be independent
It's funny hearing you bitch about some guy you liked when that was the same guy I had a couple months before you 😏 #theyneverchange tehehe
Special treat! private label wine – “A Voice for the Animals” Syrah will be available for tasting & purchase at the #ChocoTweetup!
Oracle Announces Availability of Advanced Metering Infrastructure Vendor Adapters for Oracle Utilities Smart Grid ...
tonight at legroom in da building! come in and get yo buzz on!
happy birthday to one of the most inspirational men in my life, <3
Best Jordans ever. The 4's are a close second. RT : Jordan cool grey 11's came out today! yea buddyy
im scared of kittens. LOL JK.
for lunch w showing Scarpetta!
ooohhh thought u was talkn bout me for a sec there 😳
ok I give up
Special Day @ Nelson house. 1st day the whole family works from home. Cool to think Asher wont remember mom or dad having 'go 2 the office'
how common is this though? I am sure Bo isn't the first or last to do this.
I can't see the emoji lol
I have a 3 for the price of 2 coupon. ;^)
where's mine? lol
Food Fact of the Day: April 9, 1850 William Prout died, he was the first to classify food into 3 main divisions - carbs, fats and proteins.
how the hell are you?!! :)
I love my sparkly toe nails! <3
“: “: I wish was here to turn up with me right now #Awol” Its not a party if Gibsons not there”
Money cannot buy happiness, but its more comfortable to cry in a Mercedes than on a bicycle.
Please email your idea to .
"I refuse to believe we live in a world where that mouth breathing walrus does anything better than me"
Bre you ain't call me !!!
don't sleep on them they in the playoffs for a reason and we need Chris Bosh
Hanging with before the show! Get to Sunshine Studios in CO Springs to see them play! Doors are at 6:30!
I know it's awesome
Damn, Amare is doing his best Run, nice chain and hat
RT : "Insist on yourself. Never imitate."-Ralph Waldo Emerson
Powerful time sharing communion this morning Shouldn't have waited 13 yrs to try it. Very moving experience for everyone.
Sounds fantastic!
Dim Mak Studios tonight, goals: punch a bro, sleep with a lebanese chick, meet a nigga i REALLY don't trust and give him one of my ex's #'s
happy Tuesday! What is on the agenda today?
you gonna try out next season?
thanks lady! Xxoo
RT Happy Monday Hatters! Your goal today? BE BOLD.
Make me your follow friday bitches!!!! X
prayers up boo!!!
Watching "Dancing With the Stars" with Viggle. Get real rewards just for watching TV.
aww yeah you is playing with the 17s yall lost bad??
This is the Nothing is ever right. ...but the rules are the rules.
good one for sure maybe u can join me and Kevin Werner in our ritual Thursday onion texting of best headlines
the WWL news blast had that too! Someone needs to proofread! (Phew, no typos:)
I can appreciate Kobe telling the truth and calling out his teammates
now that looks like a meal!!!!!! yum nomnom. nom.
I couldn't figure out whose it was. Can I go in and credit you? :-)
food coma.
good things come to those who wait :)
Best interview ever? just sang "It's Time To Party" to and me over the phone. See him on Sunday.
I thought you were wearing a headdress the whole time.
what should I do when I don't want to do anything?
and i knew that song before it was on the radio :(
I look forward to hearing the words "Minority Leader " and better yet "Former " (someday).
Ashley: "Tommy accepted my friend request on Facebook!" Me: "Tommy is a shitbag."
I just sent a big message out into the universe. I pray that it's well received and that people will be receptive. All I can do is wait now.
More than 10 percent of children between the ages of 2 and 5 are overweight, double the proportion since 1980!
Starting with the Outback Bowl. Football all day
Embroidered while she munched on a cucumber, of course.
I just lost 20 mins of my life at the Starbucks drive thru for a $2 coffee.
#BieberMemory at the concert, we were going up the escalator & i fell on it & everyone looked and starred. funniest thing of life
isn't it weird to think: she was 2 when we were living in Allison Hall. Time sucks.
Just started following you...hope your wife is okay.
GM Beauties! InnerQuote: "The simple act of paying positive attention to people has a great deal to do with productivity".-Tom Peters
I just did. :) RT : Why don't you text me anymore?
lucky Hope your having a fantastic time !
Barkley in a dress for Weight Watchers, NFLers in Depends adult diapers. My fave PR rule: be controversial. Love brands taking a chance.
i just died of happiness :) made a pretty awesome weather girl. my night just got better
How could anyone dislike Dirk
": Ignore a #Scorpio and they will make sure you never forget them."
“: See you soon! RT Going to be headed out to the event today! Excited!”
q Legal and beautiful
Commercials so-so so far...wondering what's up with Tibetan fish stew
what about female team execs? Keep the focus on women and tell a story that isn't told.
I got a new phone yay me :D
So. I've decided that if I ever buy clothes. It will be only from banana republic. That's my shit. All day err day!
Hey, you've got nothing to be sorry about! Trades are part of the business.
For realz. I wish this was the only thing keeping me from running for office.
hit up for info.
TBS's Conan Blimp flying over Baltimore right now.
Romney commits to, before the decade is out, landing a man in his Swiss bank vault, & returning him safely to the US
and it seems the NYFG's getting their swag. cant be ignored....they will not be impacted by Lambeau much.
Let's go Rangers!
They were probably on an acid trip
Joe will be in West Seattle this afternoon, cleaning air ducts & 2 loveseats...
Hahahahaha. He must be going to the Delt house to see Turtle Man
I want a boyfriend.
IF YOU NEVER HEARD THE SONG HERE IT IS NEW POP SINGLE VIDEO SHOOT TONIGHT AT CLUB ZONA LATINA THIS SATURDAY !!!!!!!!!!!
I love this month no drama Justin bieber boyfriend video Justin bieber turn to you! :D oh yeah it's Amazing ps I love that song turn to you
thanks Elizabeth! :)
Hello, my name is Monique, and I'm a coffee addict and I regret nothing.
i start my internship in the morning, too! good luck girl :)
Follow she follows back! :P <3
RobWay selected his twitter name b/c it describes #GOP Way= #GOP ROB from Americans 2 get Their WAY= #GOP ROBWAY!
Join me for First Thursday tomorrow in the Pearl 13th & Johnson with Extreme Training - Special Offers! #pdx events
they don't say it's more beautiful than usual, they're just slightly more likely to notice it
Baseball is the most boring sport....... Ever. #isitfootballseasonyet?
am i the only one not watching the steeler game?
"I stay cool & dig all jive. That's the way I stay alive." HBD to Langston Hughes (pretty much Uptown's first MC).
#hay #i #like #austin #carter #mahone #& #i #also #like #using #hashtags #cause #im #just #cool #like #that #you #jelly ;)
It's not a purse, it's called a satchel. Indiana Jones wears one.
RT YOU CAN GET SHOT FOR WHAT YOU WEAR? THEN HOW COME NO ONE SHOOT WHITE PEOPLE FOR WEAR CROCS
"Too many ontologies are created" like "too much is published". Best if many participants & good ways of IDing most valuable stuff.
If somebody tells you that you can't reach your goals, don't bother telling them you can, show them.
Since Ricketts sold Cubs' soul to Boston leadership, anybody know if they'll be serving baked beans at Wrigley next season???
two things in common. Zombies and we are both quality
I Swear i Have Bad Luck!
they're here...
srry i didn't reply back, i fall a sleep, how r u?
tix to what? gr8 org u have! we do the same thing 4 mentally disabled
I think #Twitter is trying to reinvent the wheel again because everything from Timelines to DMs is screwed up.
Agreed! :) " Keep your face always toward the sunshine - and shadows will fall behind you."
So what did you think of it?
Would love to write songs with you <3
im bout to come up!
no, i don't. it drives my wife crazy.
Hey, I just wanted to let you know your voice is amazing! :D
If you want an independent Massage Therapist, but are not comfortable coming to his location, have him come to yours
Government's business is in governance, and ensure people get the representation they need. - Mofe Boyo of
Headed to Louisville. Meet me at Koinonia Christmas! Tonight 7p in HH. If you can help, set up starts 3p. See you there!
Bernalillo County Sheriff Deputies investigating fatal pedestrian accident at Isleta & Sanders in SW
I want a MacBook so bad now.
Will there ever be an end to music?
tell me who's there
Good job(: I knew you would! 👍😃
Guys with thick eyebrows >>>>
Rom 4:5 But to him not working, but believing on Him justifying the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.
Cleaning my room. Bobby pins. Everywherre.
You're going to suffice in your own vagina . Yeah it's that big .
#Thethingis u complicate my life, u make me fall for u nd then u just push me to the edge
I wonder how will it taste.
Thanks so much for your kind mention. Hope you like my work. Dr. Doug
“: Srsly. We have problems in this country & these morons are asking whether Obama is a socialist. Sad pack of fools.”
respectfully disagree. Everybody likely wishes they had a 'do-over' at one point in their life.
ppl jus stupid nowadays
Join us at 9&11 am Sunday for the lesson "Now is the Time:God Given Opportunities". Lesson by Rev Pat, meditation by Rev David Belton,...
Bomb dot com
I finally ordered a Road ID. Don't have one yet? Do it now. Coupon ThanksChris5706423 saves a buck - valid 30 days www.RoadID.com
If you didn't know...Mammograms are now a part of preventative care, which means no deductible or co-pay cost with your health insurance...
8 of 10 succeed in that program.
you ate in one of my favorite cities! Don't skip the market!
Anyone else tuned into the press conference right now?
a! We ♥ u guys! If it wasn't for u, might still be d
Big sister has a new video!!! OMG, eff work, I'm about to watch this! lol
ha! Flip side: stopped txting some b/c they never txted back. When I ran into them they asked why I don't reach out anymore.
Anyone under 21 didn't get the relevance or know Zombie's entrance music
aww thanks so much :) means a ton!! you deserve way more subbers <3
NYT's Collins: Problems with education are evolution and states' ownership of NCLB. How about the 25 year failure to teach reading?
Then I can't come then. What are we going to do?
We're honored to host the BNI Mountains West Networking Group (Movers & Shakers Chapter), Wed, 12/21, 11:30AM to 1PM. Cheers!
The technology is a tool. Theories and principles are still the same. Need to adapt theories & principles to new tools
Why my old profile still da same
Thanks for the love babe!!! #MuPhi!!!
I'm on a mission #soexcited!
I think I found my happily ever after :)
why Ru moving
Happy Haitian flag day !!! Haiti stand up !!!
What's my name again?
“: #AGirlDeserves Your undivided attention. Don't ever take her for granted.” see what I mean... Told you
Just passed Brian Wilson on union street in sf. He was carrying a yoga mat. Fear the beard!
I need a therapist.
My phone has water damage and now I am using an old backup phone. I feel so antiqueted without a smart phone.
I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their intellects
I read my horoscope and I can't wait to see what today bringsz
Completed my 4 1/2 miles on the trail and feeling good!!!
I don't have service on my phone right now :(
I love the aggregated congressional tweets one! What a great idea.
- just a messenger - i missed putting in the attribution
R.I.P. Whitney
So today in #DFW the railroad commission is looking to approve a bullet train from the D to H-town in 1hr hmm I wonder how it'll work
Dear people who question why girls go to the bathroom together? Hermione went alone and got attacked by a troll Haha i saw this and love it
who am I to crush any ones dreams ?
battle of the floppers next..
hahaha my sister adopted some girl's pet and the girl sent her a message about it so my sister added her.
I like your bedside comment from last night
you will never notice me or follow me back so sad :( thinking about giving up on you
I honestly don't think anyone knows how much means to me </3 I wish I could explain my feelings for this boy
This salad with 's chicken is incredible! 🍴
Yes I can.
- I LOVE Princeton too. Just everything about him makes me smile.!!!!!!
congrats on the re-design. keep up the good work ... love filmanthropy. looking forward to the fiction films.
M&A Tip of the Day-When selling your business, make sure your all your financials are in order. This will help greatly with due diligence.
Thanks a lot to for having me on in Baltimore to talk some #Caps on !
Flipped on & am happy to hear I'm less happy to hear the fashion-ignorant callers.
I'm wearing mr #Rams hoodie over them....no one can tell :)
RT if you like --- it's FREE pretzel day today!! Come to TCA for your pretzel!
3200 at 100/200-25a #wsop34. Dinner break in an hour hope I'm still in then!
cake cake cake cake cake cake cake cake cake cake cake cake cake cake cake!!!!
But I need pics of teachers randomly for the historian video :/
I can't be yo super man....
LOL RT "I need some pussy. Here kitty kitty"
We haven't had success with either (unless really small site), we migrate manually. We work on remote site (but both work well)
Really hope this happens RT : everybody drools over LeBron all year as he wins the #MVP. Then he never shows up in the playoffs
RT : Netherlands dep ambassador says women's rights not just nice to have but a global security imperative
#Caffeine #Addicted Best Thing Ever.
Shopping, heading to Clear Harbor RT hey, what are you and doing in waupaca today?
": I will always be a fool for the game I love !baseball !" U love cameras. U don't love baseball, be honest with yourself
where are you! L.a.?
1st audition of the year on Wed. Let's get it crackalackin'!
hell yeah bro.. I'm anxious
I love biology and thick rimmed glasses.
XD Oh dear. Should I be concerned?
No complaining... All smiles... Fuck I look like letting you bring me down while your happy... Fuck out of here
Final playoff game this weekend, GMEN V PACK. I would not be surprised if NY pulls an upset...I just can't pick it. Packers 44 Giants 24
#FlyMeToLondon so i could live there forever please
Tweeps - Do you know of any insightful school librarians I should follow on twitter?
Had a great weekend with my bae
AT&T says they cover 97% of Americans. I'm the 3%
Have you ever had a herniated disk?
#ThingsILookFor DAT PUSSY!! Ok not really..
We have a 6th sense for detecting the people who get hangovers ;)
It sure didn't feel that long - does that mean it's now Saturday? And I can go home?
is Standing up 2 Cancer: Friday @ 8pm on every network!
RT : was the 1st person in line for the iPhone4S in Las Gatos' Apple Store this am. Nice tribute 2 your friend Jobs! URock!
I'd really like to know what McDonald's workers think of coneing...xD
Jesse Jackson Sr. and Andy Thayer in front row at debate.
Zooey, do you really need to use Siri to tell you whether it's raining as you're standing at the window, watching it rain?
follow me ?
what, you're flying to Sea again? =D
“:doing great! It's been to long since I have seen you. We definitely need to hang when I come back to LA!
Looking forward to catching up with you at #ncte! I'm going to follow you around and soak up some wisdom!
Powerful lunch stroll with TU kiddos that've taken over Broad St. Can't wait to hook back up at Penn later
Im To Busy Sleeping Lol.
Free Open bar all day until 5 at Karma lounge 5th/congress. Spread the word! Open to the public! Free massages from 2-5pm!
says Mary has a "tender loving ghost"
The daughter has YET to settle on a costume 4 2nite. The son's waiting to the very last minute at which time he'll throw something together.
More girls talk dirty during sex than guys.
New Specials, Chef has put together delectable delights featuring the beef burger (The Bonanza), turkey burger(Georgia) & veggie(The Lydia)!
never thought I'd say this but I actually wanna go back to school (I miss JJ and Blaise)
oh no. Like.. ass in your face?
yeah just have them put it in a plastic bag like the Canadians do.
Good thing I'm not sleeping tonight. I'll keep one on the yard.
my last night as a 21-year-old, gotta celebrate like one
Feel better soon, sweetie!
Hey Guys! It's great to see some new followers! :) ♥
Good luck to at the Pam Am Games in Brazil!
Fuck everyone that left the #Brewers game early. Don't come back. We don't need u
Yup. It's happenin. You have no control over it. You will now forever be known as, "Gorilla Girl".
the bomb
Cheer loud when you see the most amazing ArtWalk "float" at the Coast Guard festival parade tomorrow. Unique is an understatement.
Listen at work today. More tickets up for grabs before 6pm!!!
Veep! Starring Julia Louis Dreyfus. New HBO show.
1963 - Peter, Paul & Mary win their 1st #Grammy for “ If I Had a Hammer”
Summer and art: what's the best way to get two things together?
I know, right?!
Ready to get off work and get some grubb.
She Snapped:DD
when twitter says what's happening it reminds me of zayne vas happening?
i honestly don't know how you live with yourself. you're the piece of shit for saying that to who is the nicest
Go for the Spanish Fly. One of my favorites :)
Santoromentum?? Please stop,
2 an a half men....the best in sarcastic comedy!!!
Happy veterans day
There is a twitter war going on in Turkey right now, intertwined with twitterbots sending random tweets to be famous
. story about Zach Tomaselli retraction went viral because of the power of social media -
LMFAOOOOO one of my friends say that I pack "guns".... AND HE'S A GUY! XD I didn't know I hit THAT hard or I had muscles. I never noticed...
The Zingaro is on UNM campus right out side the student union building, so if your on campus stop by and get a great lunch!
Good news for the guys : is debuting Tower 20 beer tonight at 5. Get out of the office and go across the street!
How many points did Patty Mills need to win the scoring title?
Funny- because its true... RT : ": I hate two-faced people. It’s always so hard to decide which face to slap first.
jp... It should go both ways... If you aint satisfied wit whatchu got
maybe I learned Lisp too early, no matter how amazing a language I'm studying I know it will never match Lisp's beauty and flexibility
Why did I text her FUCKKKKKKKKKK
Congrats to the Coyotes! Hockey history was made. Very cool!
Pretty sure I just heard someone on ESPN Radio call it "Chez Ravine". Is this some new French bistro next to Dodger Stadium?
cuz #ravens know they stink at it: Doss, DReed, JHarper, Marcus Smith, Demtrus Williams, MClayton. Why waste another pick?
you're cute ily
RT : when we empower our students to lead (and give them room to make mistakes) that is when we're truly serving them.
At cookout y da hell dis person taking so long to order! Ugh
#MilwaukeeDictionary Victims: Victors popular lounge on Van Buren often filled with thirsty cougars who prey on younger men.
Yeah its a straight steezz
its so hot.
And winter break has begun! More time with family and more time on the court
Thanks #Follow check her out!!
lol its ok. He can troll my dreams any night. Yawns lol
Nice glove save by Nabokov with 25.2 left in 1st period.
I forgot I had my glasses on.. I hate blind tanning!!!
Your problem is you're... too busy holding onto your unworthiness. ~Ram Dass
Oka everybody understand this.. Just because you see a light skinned girl and boy together does not mean they are brother and sister.
Ur slogan's so #winning haha
I have never had WHATABURGER :(
finally at gate. jeesh. now five hour flight. will be exhausted and it will only be 130 pm there
Dave and Adrian do not want to hear my rant on how great, Great Wraps is.
Just told a worm with low self-esteem that it look really nice today. It blushed, then passed out.
That's cuz the beach ppl know what's up RT they went awesome the beach people like me
God bless America. RT : America's Funniest Home Videos has been on for 23 years.
How is MONDAY treating everyone?
Just had a lovely visit with some people from NY! Hope they decide to officially submit a recipe for our Drink of the Month contest.
And another chance...
Get some social skills with #socialfluency before your next event or night out
If we get Bennett and UCONN transfer Oriakhi we should at least have the overall #2 class if not the #1 for the 4th straight year!
Bout to get dressed then off to school
how old is she?
"I thank you for this pen and ink ammunition. Thank you for the inspiration."
CAN i have ur gamertag??? PWEEAASEES? i got all the new zombie maps, plus im like 4th prestige! :D
no idea actually what do u suggest
I don't follow racing, can they start the race after something like that? Seems the heat would damage the track.
So unbelievably tired right now, with a few hours to go.
Expect some new tracks to be dropped in the next couple days off our upcoming EP Travellers, and get ready for
I guess were all as fucked as we should ever be than. I say embrace it...
"what restaurant isn't farm to table?"- Thomas Keller. Um most of them are not. I don't agree with this flippant dismissive response
Thanks Sammy!
good morning meteorologist
Abandoning run | For now anyway. Seems wise. | But then.... holding call! |
Playing a little #CallofDuty #MW3 while we wait for The Big Bang Theory to start.
Decided to wait until now to begin travel to #stallis. Waiting for traffic to die down, FTW!
Picked my mom up from the train station... So tired
Britney is still sexy for her age, STOP! Lol. 😔
preciate the words of wisdom..no ones too good advice
wants to know what is your favorite #popcorn flavor. Give us a shout and you might see your favorite on the Popped! truck.
for WTF Wednesdays. $1500 bucks up for you including top pay out of $1000. Everyone is invited.
are you bullet proof?
College students, start your Summer off right... come hang tonight Awesome worship & preaching, Jesus + Krispy Kreme
Tweet Tweet?
DS: George Zimmerman was wearing a Steelers jacket when he was released on bond. Figures. Fuckin' Steelers fans killing people...
I have just discovered that if you mistype "to get" in just the right way, autocorrect makes it "Tibet" Not even close.
I've got family obligations and Pebble is several hours from me, what about coming to S.F. for the US Open?
Who dat second half
I'm About To Break It Off With You . Cause I Can't Take The Bullshit You Put Me Through !
My dog is hardcore judging me atm.
Thanks - Looking forward to your updates!
Call to the post
* mass producing tutus*
Noted! Thanks.
Innovative men. Entrepreneurial spirits :
Ur so busy saying why?...but I'm thinking why not.
MERRY CHRISTMAS EVERYBODY! =D
That fast lyfe ain't it! Specially if u ain't bout dat! Do somethin positive n focus on bball or football or somethin! Straight up!
Q: How do evangelicals react to politicians who wear that religion on their sleeve?
W00t soon to be Mr. Kate! Hurray.
why are we moving? is the house haunted?
I'm so hungry I could eat at Arby's.
Memphis Music Monday is at it again! Join us and the Memphis and Shelby County Music Commission Monday May 7th for a night of live music!
Food Fact of the Day: March 15, 1980 McDonald's debuts Chicken McNuggets in Knoxville, Tenn. They are so popular a 2nd supplier is needed
hahah people would be like who the fuck is this person
RT "Nearly all men can stand adversity, but if you want to test a man's character, give him power." - Abraham Lincoln, 1809-1865
RT : This lady just asked me, "Why do the Wynn and Encore look exactly the same?" Why?? Because they're both strip clubs???
I have been eating everything I can jajajaa;)
Oh right, I've actually done that before, but it was called something else. I couldn't tell if it helped me or not
First Degree Murder , You Can Get Yo Degree Motherfucker .
going with sonic boom nail polish... maybe it will help motivate me to get some homework done on a sunny spring day ;)
wow! two giants coming together. How much per latte? $20? haha
Congrats #Rangers. Anything that allows me to look at Lundqvist in HD is ok by me.
www.SaveTodayCentral.com is here for you! The best one-stop site for all the daily deals in Oklahoma City. Click and find your savings!
oh okay,that sounds great!
but I have cramps all the time 'till like the 4th day
How many ppl should I expect want to join in a Google+ Hangout tomorrow 1 pm about #mhblogday? Trying to keep expectations in check.
I'm bad at lit.
if it were Jose Canseco bobble head day I would consider. This is good though.
Someone asked billionaire Ricard Branson "How do you become more productive?" His answer, "Work out"
we're load testing for LanDiego :P
Narrating our adaptation of JC Superstar at Peace UMC this morning
In a good way or a bad way? RT Reidy My bedroom smells like a bowling alley
I don't know, but he had enough attitude to make you think he's been at it 50 years! He mellowed out after a bit, though.
I am so not ready to focus on baseball
Join us tomorrow beginning at 11am for $1 Street Tacos! Beef, Chicken or Veggie - all proceeds benefit the Whole Planet Foundation!
I'd like a large pizza. One slice pepperoni. Once slice cheese. One slice...
yuck I'm watching up haha have you seen Nathan's new video?!?! Omg so cute
I told her she was extra, then she got mad and walked off back to her register and baged this lady groceries. Smh
Moms Cooking Next Door To My Room In The Kitchen And She Has Acuyuye Blasting #AlguienAyudame -____-
News Leonard, Chappell tied for Disney lead Justin Leonard chipped in three times for birdies in a span of five holes to hel
You're Gonna Look So Beautiful Ari!! (: xx
Ready to get the fuck out of Intermediate School. -_-
yeah.. For
Literally had that exact same experience just now.
I am disappointed since Channel 55 no longer airs Jeopardy at 5:30 PM
you're not the only one :c
I don't like being home alone!
Thanks for the RT. ;) Miss you guys!
Ah ha
That sounds about right.
Thanks for coming in tonight!
Mines not its amazing, but like a cop if youu try to stop ull have to taze me......uh!
You're our 700th follower!! Congrats! Will you be able to attend #bloodybrunch on Sunday to pick up your prize?
tea and company
Watching #RAW :-D
Just watched LONDON TO BRIGHTON. Its a dope bt crazy movie.
I hate crying.
This is the part of me that you're never gonna ever take away from me, no...
Such a sexy song. #nowplaying bloodstream by
Just visited your site, Lovely! So exciting for high schools to provide this kind of experience. Break a leg!!
Do you know when? I'm driving back from Jackson, MS this afternoon...
5 free doughnuts from for Drew's A's today!!
and so are you!!
I hope you win that jean jacket on !
Carmelo just tied it, now he'll end it
When driving down the road of life, rarely do you know how good you have it, until you see it in the rear-view mirror.
why thank you...how is the #knee?
God’s power can change things in a heartbeat, in the twinkling of an eye, before you even know it, in a split second, God can do a miracle.
Next up on social media analytics. Looking forward to this presentation as I'm still not used to the new Google Analytics
Sprint burned my ass,now im back to straight talk! I dont have to worry about bills!
In past few months I have gone thru a roller coaster of changes, big challenges in my life. After a cloudy season, skies seem clearer now.
hahah that's cool :) what kind of phone did you get?
potential new bandmates to audition this week- stoked w/ fingers crossed!
hahahaha no you legit don't
what are u doing?
Hope everyone is off to a good Monday!
Today's Feature: Fried Chicken Sandwich w/ bacon, LTO & roasted red pepper spread on brioche bun Soup: Roasted Butternut Squash
Did you know a Living Wage is good for the local economy? More $$ in the pockets of residents = more customers for local businesses!
puhhhlease back me up on this.. school food was THE POOP! Every time sum1 brings it up I think of u, we loved it! lol
Cognitive-behavioral therapy for kids with ADD/ADHD can help the whole family handle the disorder.
can you imagine the chaos? German shepherds barking. Kids crying. Sounds like something from Nazi Germany!
Stomach on full
Bride told me the only single guy at her wedding will be her 4 yr old nephew. I hope he likes my dress.
Do people in Mexico celebrate the 4th of July the same way Americans celebrate Cinco de Mayo?
Great #Doodle for Charles Dickens 200th birthday today (did you need a link to google?)
When your 📱has "°" that symbol and you know your fucked<<
David Ortiz will stay in Boston after accepting arbitration
not if Denver signs Manning
Is it positive or negative you be the judge
good luck! you can do it!
And I'll be here by the ocean just waiting for proof that there's sunsets and silhouette dreams.
thank you dear
please follow me. My day has been terrible. Hopefully one good thing might happen today.
Oh Emma Stone looks so incredibly glam - love her dress!!
That looks very cool! ;-)
Hi there. Your best bet is to call the hostess to check on cancelations. We hope to see you soon! -Rachel (Stanton & B&E)
the oyster inside of me is deadd
Thank you. Nice to see you here at the studio for
Let ya next move be ya best move.
thanks for sharing Francis!
Networking 101 should be a required course.
It's not the situation that determines the reaction,the steps of a righteous man are ordered by the Lord,,so you and God got this.
Hope not! All this spam is incredibly annoying
Can't wait 2 see y'all in Houston! : Happy
For those of you who said "I wish people would celebrate Jesus the way they do MJ," until I see Jesus moonwalking across my TV, no deal.
#Chiefs Romeo has such a calm and decisive presence in press conferences. He knows his vision for this team and how they will get there.
Oh my... RIP Whitney Houston :( the greatest. She was in an elite group of singers. I love you.
no she doesn't.
hahah... Today was probably the 3:30 day? I don't even remember when I told you that ;) Can we share the assistant?
#quote "Experience is the child of thought, and thought is the child of action." ~ Benjamin Disraeli
People are going to smoke weed regardless.. The government Might as well make it legal and make money off that shit
Off to off-season baseball practice
Switch to the plain text editor for videos. Rich text always auto embeds unless you force in a hyperlink.
No problem!
To be in the medical field is cool; to be in law school is tough; but to be in the world of art is beautiful.
bible cn b a good tool 4good or evil (judging/manipulating) let's be mindful that our conscience is the best guide.
Rangers showing some heart in Denver tonight...
My mother is Officially A Chef :)
don't forget about sword boy. Unless he kills himself..... He did fuck up
a lot of people don't got to jail for murder, & no one knows what he did to make him kill him
Unruly 3.5 year old+being late=ugly Mommy.
so we drive in 5 min to the airplane to dresden,from dresden we fly to Frankfurt and then to New Haven :D :D.
White males get kicked around too.,mostly by white females. It is UNFAIR to WHITE MALES .Nobody gives us a break, we are always the bad guys
.... no RT : People who drink stink too.
be ready to toss the ball around
Sometimes my parents piss me off so much
umm all week?are you working on your birthday? whatever day you're not we are doing ALL of those things. I don't even care.
Hey, the click is ticking on our meetup, huh?
I HATE THUNDERSTORMS.
So sleepy and hungry
RT : if I should have a part 2
Referring to Caleb Brantley?
,and I learn daily from following the great relationship gurus that YOU are
Medical emergency in the stands 1.6 to go lakeland ball when we resume
The 3 religions in which both members of a married couple are from the same religion are: Hindus (90%), Mormons (83%), and Catholics (78%).
Sunday= laundry day ^_^
lmao! you'll get used to it!
Actually, thank YOU!
going to bed mad is the worst
So, I think tomorro I'll be posting some new videos =) hehe
im finna bust threw that window..lol nawl j/k
Follow me on Instagram
No, go away please.
Bubba will be an instant star if he wins.
follow my hubby team follow back 2012 aint over its just the beginning
like the new avi
Grateful to our US House and Senate staff for continuing to support our & priorities at DC visit.
not me. don't do it. i know you're thinking about it, but don't follow me! i bet you can't accept that challenge(;
Go see Hobo With A Shotgun and Takashi Miike's 13 Assassins.
Can't wait to film Multi Ethnic
maybe another KY broad and lick you again. KY is a special place.
:) thanks ..& thanks for listening & encouraging me
if you're in NYC, they have a copy of the book in the NYPL and FIT.
Happy Friday everyone! Feels good to be back on the #FF bandwagon!
so frustrated right now #CantDeal omg!
i KnEw ALoT mORE tHaN u ThOuGHt i DiD FoUnD OuT ALoTtA ThiNgZ u THoUGhT u HiD
happy birthday austin i would of said it earlier but i was cleaning. i hope u have the best birthday ever <3 u
which article?
"Fixed' information literacy vs relational information literacy
I took a nap at 5 and woke up at 10 oops
All our notes are yours
not for Miami....night to eat outside
chillin getting ready gonna go spin at cafe 787 ....I was talking to ur bro about him getting me in DAMN
You know what I'd like to see? RDA training that isn't presented as a compare/contrast with aacr2. Bring in new metadata specialists!
who did you meet? Was it Snooky?
still high from lastnight,cloud 9, chilling wit mad dikes,in the dark fucking with flashlights
I think so haha
yes,getting older, gage, my sister, rich, myself, dogs, little Cesars, pb&j, davinci, committed,
i want kim kardashian
Your getting audited! Lol
#FF modeling wizard
You may be out of my sight, but never out of my mind.
Hey and can we make #alternatepurposesforthe223project a trending topic?
Deleting my endless amount of pictures from Legas Vegas just so I can get all these pictures of parent daughter on my camera
When setting up a blog, consider your audience. Keep your posts on topic and packed with good information. They'll come back.
This will definitely help. It works out because with the VA his is all covered.
Valentine's Day is around the corner. Guys, what do you prefer, a Bikini or Brazilian wax?
Not a fan of David and Rachel on #AmazingRace. Talk about toxic relationship under pressure.
Do you people have such bad cases of ADHD that see need to do the wave and Journey sing-alongs while they set up the fireworks?
I don't like the person who picks out your rags it sucks !!!!
Hunt: got caught up in being "even-handed" when 90% of atrocities being committed by Serb army.
Sprint subscribers may be seeing the Galaxy Nexus LTE debut on April 22 a leaked document says. Anyone have Ice Cream sandwhich installed?
a beautifull freezing Thursday in Dallas..have a wonderful day people!!!
Thanks for the follow. I'd love to chat sometime.
Why are my friends so old! We are already in for the night!
negative ghost rider.
Yeah, I know isn't for the band formerly known as Group of the Altos. I'm expanding their brand, kimoslobee.
Why Is Ari So Beautiful? (:
I wanna name this like BeliebInMahone or something but there all taken. Any ideas.?
Thanks for the head's up! We're taking care of the issue now.
bon voyage + don't forget to write! xo
yes sir! We got that win. Good shit team
I'll come!!
What special things are you doing for your #pets this #holiday season?
Had such an amazing time with everyone at Craftacular today! Xoxox
Or this grinder just really good
man people crazy
I just finished the 4th season of #TheBigBangTheory and can't wait for what's next!
Less than 31 Days to the Amazing Milwaukee Race #3!
Getting my Twitter page setup.
Ditto RT You Do????! Awesome! I wanna sign up for that! :)
#coldplayonidol is good.
just saw never say never for the second time.....it was awesome....justin bieber is so talented......love him
no prob & big shout outs to Rocco & his beautiful wife who made out night extra unforgettable!
I am all kinds of sore this morning... No idea why. I don't like this.
A Web site titled “The Pi-Search Page” finds a person’s birthday and other well known numbers in the digits of pi.
I wish these folks would shut up about Zimmerman..he has been charged and made bond..none of y'all woulda even made that bond
hey i just wanna say thanks for being bold and your song "i choose jesus" has been awesome for me in this transition i'm
This may b the only time I may cheer 4 Kane this year
Yes, a celebration is in order! And celebrate you will. This stress/frustration/anxiety? Not normal state of affairs:
I have the worst tan line ever.
Show Jersey why you're the #ComebackCats !! Wake up and win those power plays!!
Lawmaker Demands DHS Cease Monitoring of Blogs, Social Media
You betcha, can never get enuf Back to School advice! RT : Thanks for the rt
The best way to learn somethin is thru experience. Soo imma let you go thru the pain....
I took another month off twitter and today I googled me and saw dozens of my tweets coming up and got all nostalgic... Happiness is twitter
Just participated in a tagathon on Flickr with help from & (I'm laptop-challenged; thx 4 patience!)
i haven't had a proper conversation with you for ages
that pic is hilarious thoight and we would like to make it up to you with a free eat cheap week meal on us tomorrow!
Still not caught up w/ this season, & I hate to say it but so far this season of #VampireDiaries isnt as impressive as the 1st 2.
Panther is a MUST!
So glad you agree! :) Any tips to share?
you got it gurl :D
Is it just me or have u noticed in the gym; no one ever smiles? Just all serious.
Hello Spring...I have missed you! :)
just had lunch with dad at a little chat with Stan and Ryno, told them they have to win tonight!
This liquor got the best of me.
On to equal rights: Fletcher says he supports equal rights for all people. Filner agrees.
I'm the shit. Too bad your brain hasn't filled that large skull.
Now Rugby and lacrosse season has started...my son is officially on an Xbox diet. Yay!
#shutthefrontdoor how drunk were you last night?
Its Wednesday already. Half way down the week.
The Giants win the Pennant! The Mayor (Bloomberg) proclaims Souper Bowl Week in NYC--Mon,Jan30-Sun,Feb5--in honor of our soup for the needy.
From now on, I'm going to refer to shitting one's pants as "shooting bogey."
what is lol
HEY CAT THIS IS REMINDER TO TAKE YOUR OWN ADVICE ALRIGHT.
When did she say that? Sounds like an interesting speech
Let's thank our sponsors w/ tweet love. 4 their help in making #jinglemingle happen. We can't do it w/o U.
Aussies face German Davis Cup challenge Australia will face Germany in Germany in September for the right to return to the Davis Cup worl
I'm going back to DePaul in the fall
How do you keep a straight face on camera when Santorum says something like "America works from the BOTTOM up"?
Definition? RT : Word of the day "BACKSLIDER" LOLOLOL
Milo ! May list na ba sections ?
I wanna interview U RE: UR upcoming country album on my radio show on Froggy 104.9,Frankfort, KY, who is my contact 2 set it up?
love this photo
Aye Aye Aye Aye !! Leave Me T'f Alone Chick !!! Damn !
Cat nap in the grass at the St. Paul campus. Z
Practice tonight! Yeah!!!! A.M
let me follow more people!
Haggaaaaaa..."you wanna date?"
I have a sure fire 1st ballot Orioles Hall Of Famer, Brad Pennington. Can't wait for his plaque, place it on Eutaw Street.
you're just jelly.
Fish fry Friday everyone!!! Come down and enjoy this beautiful weather on our awesome patio!!
Hey! follow me for amazing healthy & delicious snack ideas!
RT : -- / I hear you make those drums sound pretty dang good too. // it doesn't take much!
But I love her so much
hahaha. Thanks sloth
Say somethin, 'cause your driving me crazy. Say somethin, 'cause you're driving me wild! <3
If you love her, let her know. if you don't then stop acting like you do. We Girls don't like to be mind fucked -__-
Best interview questions for candidates to ask. Number two: How would you describe the culture of this company (or organization)?
One of the #GreatestAlbumsOfAllTime has got to be the "Black" album by #Metallica Also have to put #Nirvana "Nevermind" and #Pearl Jam "Ten"
Have to give a shout out to my new follower @ Anyone who has "All hail Nutella" in their profile is a friend of mine!
"If you do not change direction, you may end up where you are heading." Lao Tzu
The Diva conference has begun at Liverpool Hope University!
Mail Masters is looking for a marketing and printing sales executive in the Denver Metro area. A highly variable comp plan provides for unc…
A promise among friends means never giving a reason why. #Friends <3 it
I Just Did The Fainting Trick., I've Been So Tempted To Do It Since Tai Told Me About It. It Hurted My Head.! [I Love My Gf <3]]
Went shopping w. mommy <3
Both my parents got bitten by cats, So did I, too bad my brother didn't get bitten by one. Lucky boy
Always do your best. What you plant now, you will harvest later.
KEWL! I just logged in for the first time in months since I had a social media expert doing for me till now.
Stand by what has been spoken to you by the Lord... Regrets will quietly haunt you...Stay on the fight. and watch God work!
A quick cleaning session can do wonders for your sanity :) it's worth it!
THAT WAS AN INCREDIBLE PPV! IM SPEECHLESS RIGHT NOW! I ACTUALLY GAINED RESPECT FOR CENA!
no gala, but will be at afterglow!
The Banana Pudding Milkshake from Chick-fil-a is ABSOLUTELY INCREDIBLE!! It is now a #Musthave everytime I eat there!
sounds and looks delicious
Hope God bless me with a job this summer.
&#39;s, I hate your shamrock shake commercial.
I only respect Celtic fans as much as that pains me to say
Excellent! Glad we could be helpful!
I'm ready for the best summer of my life idk about you?!
Wow, haven't gotten on here in foreverr. Well hello (; how are youu?
Bensimon: Equity would rise if we remediated university culture in relation to students of color
If you break rules you should pay the price.
Rasta color braces
how funny I was just thinking " man I wanna read tweets" i look & your the first one :)
Awesome! RT : I'm going to take a different path. Shout out to for schooling my daughter!
So what am I going to SMELL TONIGHT? Drama, Mama Jokes, Love Birds Talking, Scary Story's, News, Hot Topics... hum.....
We found dove in a soap less place
Looking forward to some fun shoots with some fun cuties in San Jose from tomorrow through Sunday :)
Confession #8 I always has low self esteem growing up lol I'm serious
Learning a lot at Advice Straight Up Follow Up! Thx and Rob Sniffen!
Anyone could go tonight...
I love Remember the Titans!
Hm... Its taking a while to find our luggage... Uh oh
Learning about GoDaddy's Quick Shopping Cart
is on a quest for soup dumplings! To Arcadia!
What's the etiquette for picking up the phone when you have caller ID? Do you greet the caller by name or pretend to be surprised?
SEO dreams vs reality - Most companies have KEY PHRASES that if TOP RANKED would fulfill marketing goals but they can't afford the SEO cost.
Oxidative phosphorylation. That's what I have to study this week...giving up is tempting. Lord help me.
My hair is gettin out of control
ur welcome we should get to know each other:)!!
haha- we'll see what we can do... RT : Planning on livetweeting from the stage during tomorrow's show, huh...
I love you all!!!
The two NYR series illustrate why home-ice advantage is still critical in the playoffs. If last night's game were in Wash, who knows.
#21 craziest thing u have ever done?
not having classes or finals for three days in a row>>>
Did anyone get to see the sun today?
It's Heating up in Breckenridge! Ski the Slopes is around the corner-it'd be a great Valentine's Day Gift! Couples passes are $198 til 2/17!
If I pull your hair it means I like you, especially if you're naked and we're having sex while I'm doing it.
What is your favorite type of music to listen to #RockTalk?
We do it Straight like daaaaaat, get money straight like daaaaaat.. who want it straight like daaaaaat..2 CHAAAAAINZ!!
it the party crackin out there?
If for some reason our mediafire link dosent work for you, you can download our demos on the "bandpage" tab on our page!
ah those were the days!
great event. Great event and great space and service!
Imaginary friends lol
Is this the start of #bikeschool rerun hour?
When Justin says swag in his song❤😍
yeah her voice on this song & the beat will go with it lol
“It is not the mountain that we conquer, but ourselves” ~ Sir Edmund Hillary, the first climber to reach the summit of Mount Everest
Ha! Wow.
OMG. THE NEWS JUST PLAYED BOYFRIEND!!! MADE MY DAY!! & then they're showing contestants for a Bieber-off!!<33
Oh wow I'M LH!! Ha! ": Left-handed people are more likely to be schizophrenic."
only we can look good without a man by our side:) we legitt:) #bruhh we are a boss
lls shut up
Congratulations! And thanks for sharing your experience, and insights, with all of us.
Thanks for the shout out!
Shouts out to my new listeners from Spain, Hungary, Thailand & Romania!
And to top it all off, it looks like I'm gonna be out of town all next week due to work...grrrrrrrr!!
I sware I have a eatting disorder... I eat to much!:/
Thanks for all the RT's
I love u jasmine follow me #1 jasminator..!:)
FL Children's Hospital here we come, with breakfast!!
lmao. Don't you put that evil on y'all, Ricky Bobby...
#YouMightBeStupidIf you take things from T#*@$r (secret social network) & put them on Twitter & Facebook Fake T#*@%es you know who you are
Lily Allen Perhaps?
A quickie is not so bad tho
There is free wifi available. We'd love to provide WiFi to MLA attendees, but registration $$ would be expensive.
I should've just stayed home today:/
I forgot I was still mad at you -___-
you got it dude :)
I'm glad you were finally able to get your wishlist gift
Sonic in gallatin 3 cokes for $6 and ours is only $3 at home! I don't understand 😒
Oh the Oscars briefcases with the winning envelopes are walking the red carpet!
because we were fighting when you tweeted that
RG3 signs endorsement deal with Subway. Who doesn't love to eat fresh?
oohhh thank you very much . I wish the best for you too :)
Dominant political will in Europe will force the periphery to abandon the Euro or their sovereignty.The 2 are now almost mutually exclusive
What's your managers information? For bookings?
"how did I spend $60" haha
Looking 4 female part-time massage therapists and/or estheticians 4 a wellness center in NW,DC. DM 4 more info
Dear#Netflix, thanks for the rate hike, I've been meaning to cancel you and your aggravating home page for a while now.
Thanks so much for buying "Incomplete Passes", Elisabeth! I hope you enjoy it!
Thanks to Outlook and the #PLA2012 app, I have never been so organized (or known that I was already so overbooked) for a conference!
Gwyneth Paltrow....AMAZING!
thanks for the #ff!
got a site for you to watch football on
I'm with you. We longer have news. We have politically charged opinion and celebrity gossip. Nothing like a fat, dumb electorate.
my mom comes in my room and checks for drugs well the smell at least lol there must be a new drug out
fall asleep. thinking bout money.. wake up thinking bout money
1st workout after being sick 4 so long! kinda kicked my a$$. means I gotta get that fitness level back up ASAP. Goin hardcore starting now(;
i think ima fake being sick tomorrow, i really am in no mood for school .
"An open mind can open many doors." -Evelyn K. Lemar
Done! Thanks for following me :)
If you start to miss me remember, I didn't walk away you let me go.
why tf is you whining still i fucking told you i was gon do the shit get off my ass damn
See you in a week, Milwaukee.
Looks like is down.
You should be a professional time waster.
Life is only as awful as the amount of booze in your bloodstream at any given time.
I even want to punch that guy just thinking about that sound
We get it! Love the music humor :-) RT We have 4,440 followers today. DING! (A)
all of the above!
I done got pulled over fresh off of work ugh freakn DESOTO POLICE I FREAKN HATE U!!!!!
The photo grid trend/format is the right direction, but $2 billion & a potential copyright suit...do you think it's a good buy?
thanks for the mention, Stella!
#FF Lady with #Klout & knows how to work it.
All looked at, thoroughly enjoyed and bookmarked.
Welcome & thanks Nice to meet you!
About to join on Heller's gone so who knows what will happen! Phil, Jon & I might get into a twitter war!
I think I'm getting sick.
RT : Perk up at the World's Largest Coffee Break today at 9:30am at Catalano Square (Menomonee & Broadway). Free coffee and treats!
Brand new laptop, windows 7, try and restart new computer, blank screen,
really, should have tried the website and better fix your LinkedIn profile
Great gig with the band last night - thanks to , and Micah Goff for sitting in last night. Killin'!
RT #Quote Life is short so live the life u live the best.
What is your favorite Kurt Carr song?
Interview with about recent Pew study on Youth and Social Networking.
"Enjoy every smile and every tear, cos the most beautiful smile comes after the most painful tear"
My heart is racing
I just want summer
#InstantTurnOn: The thought of Ronald Reagan in a Speedo.
Maybe I'll feel like doing more if I don't hurt when I wake up and hurt when I go to bed.
Starting the day locked out of my computer and on the phone with help desk.
Fuck I hope some crazy woman rips his dick off when he comes to Buffalo in a few weeks. Seriously, fuck
BTW I finished Catching Fire. So good.
what bandwagon fans?? There are so many sports going into the playoffs....
yooooo u seriously need to relax!
billboard rentals
Car bombed.
Well I'll find you that day and slap you silly. :D
look at my last text !
I have put too much damn time and effort towards this. IT WILL TREND. HUSTLERS LOVE ATL so fucking much!
Onward & upward.... great day 2 be in the film industry in Louisiana! :D
re: joycevalenza! Wow Wiki! Love it. No one can talk boring wiki anymore!
Its a girls night its alright without you im gonna stay out and play out without you you better hold tight this girls nights without you
Hanging Christmas decorations with my dad. My mum ate my snack :(
Feel Better, we will miss U 2night :)
Be sure to take a lot of photos of each other now. Your relationship is changing every day.
Gotta walk my dog.
Hey Maria, if it's none of my business, that's cool, but why where there sad face tweets bout you yesterday? you leavin' us?
Lets get this shit up to 1900 followers! #TeamFollowBack I always #Followback ask anyone of my
I can't wait to give Liz the gift I made for her. I'm not sharing what it is cause someone will steal my idea. But it is special. <3
Sounds PERFECT!
omg- 1st Cd Aim & Ignite is amazing! Lmk. :)
What I need is a mobile location service that lets me avoid some people. Like "stealth mode on" They could also avoid me. I would pay.
What am I still doing up?
That annoying moment when you have that little pimple on your leg from shaving and you pop it and it scabs forever -____-
Talk Derby to me, that is the Derby Festival - Whats Happening for Thunder? Plan properly with these details and trivia:...
All of our GW paints are 10% off if you do NOT have a discount. If you do add another 5% to it!
Had a pint of that on Monday. Tweet a link when you're review is up online.
Hating school cant wait till its over and i can chill for the summer
Don't let this weather keep you from Napa Hour! Buy 1get1!
don't hold your breath.....
#SomeWhereInTheHood kids runnin to the ice cream mane like he a celebrity"
GOOD LUCK AUSTIN:)
I think I want to go get some food.
I to the same for my monmy and I'm 31. :-)
I need a pillow!!!
Preparing the 2012 work plan for LMS, training technologies and performance improvement. So far, 81 projects. Exciting!
Wait. Ke$ha isn't even that bad live. Why does everybody I've ever heard say she sucks live? And why did I believe them? Haha
Thanks to my sister that made me listen to City Of Fire You guys are awesome!
i just follow you after u follow me lol
Wow, that was a fantastic set!
you on forbes A+++++++ oh my gosh
What are the odds go 162-0? I feel pretty good about it
#houston ZeekRewards Online MLM Opportunity - Is It Right For You? If you are reading this review, chances are you are either a Zee
Friends in NOHO: join us tomorrow for an awesome standup show at the HaHa Cafe at 8pm: it's FREE!!
Well done boys! A toast to 2nd Leg ending of our XX Tour- a mighty success!!!
OKC raping mavs ... No cags involved this time !!! Go for the sweep !!! no luck needed
Haha I jus remembered the drunk guy at work yesterday who made me give him a high five ✋
Just rode 7 miles on the bike with and worked out a little. Super stoked he is here for my graduation tomorrow!
Academic and Research Libraries talk about their digital projects.
yum. Yum. And YUM!!!
Um Austin says he loves you and that he's sorry and bye.... Yea..,
*there's
RT : Deep cover...RT : Clark Gregg is on THE SHIELD as a serial rapist/murderer. This is strange and upsetting.
that is by far the nicest tweet ever! You made my day!
Move Castle at d up to d 6
a bit crazy.. not as productive as i would have liked...u?
Honey made me veggie dinner, out of this world! Time to work!
fight the good fight, Hans.
The ESA online registration and membership application services will temporarily be out of order on 10 May 2012.
you a Pacers fan or a Heat hater?
"101 Ways to Kill Mr. Cook"
uuuummm could you please stop going to the games I don't go to?
Of course my school lost in all four categories in the Math Olympics. We weren't even prepared for it. :-(
thank you I'm sure everyone appreciates it as much as me <3
RT : Very inspiring and great opportunity, thank you :)
i want volleyball season already ..
"The best part of waking up, is #Folgers in your cup" . . . Cuz who's tryna be up for work anyways?
Thanks! Have a great day!
WHAT IS YOUR LAST NAME
happy mothers day to all!!!!& watching Charlie St. Cloud with my momma's I love this movie !!!!!!!!!!!!
I like dat!!
Uh oo i sense tension with
If we didn't have anything to learn, we wouldn't have anything to become.
I say whats on my mind. I don't care if it offends you. And if I don't like you, trust me, I won't pretend to.
It's the last day of the AIAA-Aerospace Meeting!! We're always happy to be here, looking forward to the next one!
#CrazyzBill says his urethra is burning, and that he may never have a functioning penis again.
following from south of boston
Nothing to do tonight? has a new edition of 12x6 going up at 7:30pm Only $5.00! Come join us!
thank you my friend!!!
I need a hot, sunny day for that. Plus some time to convince the family it's a good idea ;)
wow congrats Rachel!!! So excited for you! Muah
I haven't tweeted on my iPhone until today. Just checked tweets
People don't share noise, they share music. Define instruments that make music in your business...people will share
Everybody loves me you can call me Raymond
RT : :) I like thinking big... if you're going to be thinking anyway, you might as well think big. Donald Trump
K thanks for the inside scoop(:
whos coming to the parade??
This is all Malarky!!!!!
#nw Hoarders, now I remember why I stopped watching this show. I stopped sympathizing with the ppl hoarding
Some of y'all so called heat Fans Still dont understand The Game of Basketball
#UseTittiesInAMovieTitle Honey, I Shrunk The Titties
please add a seattle tour! #Bring1DtoSeattle 22
Not even NYC traffic can play D on Heat. RT : Close call - Chris Bosh got stuck in traffic but made it to Garden before tip.
Thanks. It's going to be a very casual trip. 2 parks. House of Blues. Pool Time. Quick Trip.
Average American work week now between 50-55 hours. So, how do you take time out for yourself and family. explains:...
How fun! What was the piece and instrumentation?
The email I got said that they love hockey and bacon in Canada... So it'll be just like playing Detroit!
funny how he messages me to gloat that he's never been better, while I'm in hell.
getting my senior ring today. holy duck I am so excited aghhhhhh!!!!
Anybody around Naperville wanna party?
One time for your mind, one time...
Frothy mixture is kissing a lot of ass tonight (Romney, Ryan)... I guess appropriately?
Schedule your *I made it through my child's Spring Break* massage today!
Find out tonight at 8:00 p.m. on #NBC #Community why
Awww thank you! RT : Spreading my love! Friend just took his first and LOVED it!
Who else could it possibly be?????
I think we are meant to be.
Aw man you like her. She was a lil flakey to me. Hooked up w Amy in the shower then turned around to fight her.
Treat your intimate #relationships with gratitude!
Went over and talked to the rich whip-its couple. They offered me one. I declined, but those two are my heroes. They made my week.
About to have my first real meal since Friday.
I drink iron city because I'm so 412.
me too!!! except that I want to be on the giving end of the FB. what a coincidence.
When it's not one thing It's the other
I know! Likewise. <3
Omg tmrw is my last day at work after 4 yrs. I'm ending my career and moving on to bigger and better things. Amen
LMAO!! That so funny!!!
Working four hours at the Northwest branch today. Should be slow. This branch isn't known for it's large amount of patrons.
The 's 4th Annual DC Housing Expo is Sat., June 2nd from 10am-3pm at the Convention Center. It's free & open to the public!
“Independence is loyalty to one's best self and principles, and this is often disloyalty to the general idols and fetishes.” -Mark Twain
Am I crazy or does that new Chernobyl movie look pretty awesome? Who wants to go see it with me?
Oh and how we have missed you! Waffles are inherently lazy, but that doesn't mean they don't need love.
RT : Should hve took my ass to ritz tonight :(
“: Daily reminder: make at least one person happy today. #BeHappyMakeHappy” And I won't mind a bit if I'm that one person! :-)
Ima try 2 right the most offensive song that can still be played on the radio. Thats my goal 4 next month lol
THAT PIC LOOKS A LITTLE UM #FRUITY LOL
Filed report with for my #stolen mountain bike. Gary Fisher, orange/black. Buggers left me my bolt cut lock. So nice
Tonites bout to be a great nite!
that's the next step
I don't care what you hear about me...I am not that guy....and if I was I'm not anymore. #it'scalledgrowingup #pissedtweet #longhashtagday!
Augie Garrido feels his Horns need to win Baylor series or if not, the Big 12 Tourney to guarantee NCAA bid. Says hosting op is likely done.
RT : I wanted to #intro you to my new brother, our new #cmgr here Please meet of #teamNIMBLE #freshmeat :)
When is your band performing again???
Thx for coming! RT : Had a great time sharing during sponsored #PzS12 - now headed home!
#sourcefest says a shared sense of community and values help define a local voice. Do DC playwrights have that commonality?
Alabama Crimson Tide linebacker Dont'a Hightower talks about the upcoming game against the #1 LSU Tigers.
I have a feeling if we go to firehouse, a) we'll be the only ones there other than the fucker
CH Reynolds Electric Achieves Select Certification from Cisco in U.S.
post a piccc? (: i wanna see it. <3
We had a shot at this game till Lamar stepped on the court...
The new education tools from #Apple make me want an iPad more than ever
Follow us on Twitter
2 more cuts to do, 20 more pages on script to do, scan some negatives in and finish printing my color final, study 20 pictures, and study,
Alena has a nickname, but I keeps it on the DL.
YES! See you then!
i love roc and roe. Soo cute and yummy.
I live so far north in the burbs that it takes FOREVER to get a taxi. I miss ease of getting a taxi in the city
Of course it's hella nice in south city..and hella crappy up at skyline! I hope that fog burns off!
Going to bed at 1 am...#success. Will I actually sleep now?
“: I have the most fun at the music festivals when I dance in the crowd..Did u get fleas from those dirty general admission folk
I would expect that number to be higher...
still mad that I couldn't go to see ya'll smh next year
The shot is still on the bar. I will have to ask Matty if he has had any new encounters
Hmph. At least I can count on to support my mustachepirations. (cc'ing for portmanteau)
good to see u today too!!! ;)
Thanks for the help!
#Mitt isn't conservative or liberal he is spineless.
Home Gym Equipment- A Great Investment To Add value To Your Home
. I love it Kort!
eesh no riddles my mans, ima have to hit u up to let u know wut happened lol
I know!!!! How have you been?? When you come home for summer break we need to have a reunion
feeling the need to chop and/or dye the hurrr. #indecisive and in need of a change. something i can control.
When God touches you He change Everything. Around you
Boozer stealing money from the bills they over payed for his ass. Premier PF my ass.
Happy Friday all
who Levi?
Thanks Feel free to share your favorite #rhubarb dishes :) yummy!
after your concert in NYC you should have a concert in tampa :)
“: Today's world is totally not age appropriate.”
just watching tv, and u? (:
Kegging my latest session IPA & racking the Orval clone. Then playing with electronics in my control box for the new HERMS.
There is always something to be thankful for. Always always always. Be mindful of that.
I want a nigga that has #swag and knows it I hate guys who think they got something they don't
Without the use of 'roids*
Monarch butterfly just flew into the cafe, buzzed each person's head, one by one, and flew back out.
Concert Update: John Mayer Tour Canceled! Ticket purchasers should refer to their point of purchase for refund details.
Happy Mothers Day
Tom and Evan Leahy band play tonight at 7:30. This duo will make your night!
Stuck in this room for 4 hours straight doing nothing....somebody come bail me out
I remember my first ever football match - Wrexham v Orient, November 1978. Sat in the Mold Road stand and had a meat and potato pie.
Thank YOU, sir! RT : Thank you so much for the follow and the great service you provide
Contrast people created Qwitter and yes, it's a small rails community. :)
Taking bets on whether stands us up again today. Just about halfway there!
what:O
Follow the family!! ->
Haha aw thanks. Please explain this to me! I don't understand hashtags! And if a celebrity doesn't have a check mark, are theyreal
and snooki are the exact same person
I need a workout partner...seriously!
r u on the city hall beat now? I guess congratulations, is that a promotion ?
what's up? Did your folks beam you to outer space?
Finally catching up on the calendar, and then Gmail goes down.
I need a fix
McRegret: The regret you experience immediately after purchasing and consuming a meal from McDonald's. See also: You knew better.
The doctor told me she doesnt want me to lose any weight this month. Does she want me to look bad in a swim suit??
I gotta guy. I'll get some pics & show em to you.
thank you , now for a nap!
#WIFYR, Howard Taylor just dropped by our class. There is no end to the celebrities at this conference!
Even though they have shorter sleep cycles than adults, newborns typically spend more time in active (REM) sleep.
He knows he didnt do his job!! People will be after him now too! Bill Lee better go into hiding as well!
stop by
Thank you!! Really helped :D
Let's get a Wednesday Fish Fry in the books.
i followed you back
I appreciate that every Friday morning I can turn to for the best of last night's #Archer quotes.
Check our Albert Bandura. ALL learning us social! Nothing to do with the technology.
have you heard of him? hes an artist i've been working with he has some amazing plans coming for 2012 music fashion magazines
The riot scene!
#GRE question: For doctoral admissions, is the writing section important? Should more energy/emphasis be put onto verbal/quant?
Sittin here at the hospital waitin for the outcome of a friends son.
HAPPY BIRTHDAY!!!
Congrats first 20!!! :)
I cnt stand her I like tami
Saturday night delirium has set in.
Grand Tavern in Farmington has green PBR starting at 50 cents early!!
wanna make my dream come true then follow me :D plz
Doors are open! Come out and join us for a cocktail.
Getting things ready for Saturday night. Love having the girls over.
Thanks for the RT !!
Check your DMs!
can me and earl get married now or?
Not enough drugs in the world to stop this damn pain
I love Your Tweets girl!(:
We're a world apart but yet so close ❤
hey nigga, we just met at the club. i want to give you my number why dont you hit me up.. young money. LMAO
They gave up a 4th, 5th, and 7th wtf are you guys bitching about. We still have 10 picks.
I cannot stop myself around the stuff. It's my inner fat kid's happy place.
my pleasure - and thanks for making the trip down for it.
lmao bc you were being a dancing queen last night.
I still don't know the power of twitter in dialogue. We need to change academic culture valuing publications over impact.
sounds good, thanks!
If i was your boyfriend ill never let you go .<3
Ops, that was "I have a headache" for non-Italian speakers.....mi dispiace
"Operation out-awkward " - SUCCESS.
now tell me how 2 decrease the gas!
#w2e is Tim's degree of scruffiness a leading economic indicator? If so, is the correlation direct or inverted.
fredweirdo? Say what? More like sexy, #WHATCHUBETALKINGBOUT?
RT : Just because you have a foul to give doesn't always mean you should #foulforprofit (agreed)
Early #BdayShoutOut to me!!! 12min until my #bday. Yeah buddy!
Friday need to hurry up
“: Not singing the 'you' in 'gotta be you' cause you will scare the birds away trying to hit that high note.” and I
story today i hope! sorry if im annoying, im just excited(:
How are you feeling, re the vertebra? Are you still zero activity??
Hey! How are you? xoxo ♥
Keep the fam lifted up in prayer! I witness 1st hand wht that brother does 4 our youth!! All this extra shh is just the devil!
95 South bound to meet and go see lil Duval ignant ass with
Somebody just threw a wadded up piece of paper onto the floor in our cubicle area.
ditch the keys and locks?
HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO MY HOMMIE !!!!!!!
Hey #Jetsfans - are ya happy about Tebow coming to the team? I have my reservations personally (and I am a #Giants fan)
I guess the refs only call roughing the passer if tackles the QB. Geesh!
To all "green" artists out there. Love to here your picking inspirations stories. I'd like to include your stories on www.artisansgonegreen.
i couldn't open the link you sent... it said it was removed. sorry!
I really love sleeping in :)
You never invited me. :(
LOVE mine! RT : Sweater vests everywhere are shedding tears.
Don't walk like, "see I'm interesting". Enter room thinking objective.
The winners page has been updated on the website. A few more photos have been uploaded to facebook as well.
ima punch you in the mouth !
Since the Fall TV Schedule is set, I can map out my Live/DVR lineup.
It's so beautiful outside
broke the record for most popular U.S. destination! Over 50 million visitors believe it's a great summer getaway!
+4000 museos, from all 50 states and 63 countries around the world?! #aam2012 is better than ever!
#edtechnyc : It takes an 800 lb gorilla sales force to penetrate #k12, hence why we started with universities.
Any other moms go to (2) soccer games today (after breakfast in bed)?
Learning starts with faiIure; the first failure is the beginning of education.
“: You never know how strong you are until being strong is the only choice you have.” YEP.
Making your way in the world today takes everything you've got...
thanks for the follow back
If it wasn't Christmas I'd be uploading some M.I.J. right now.
Saw lots of girls in tight mini skirts tonight. Am I living in the wrong town? Where are the earthy girls in Sac?
The devil almost came outta me when that girl hit my car...
The links not working :(
#ICantStandPeople who hate on Jelena and Justin
wow! Or a close Fuck! Acceptable body!
haha all right let's get on it.
Not so many tweets from #cikm2011, compared to
What's a Harriet growler go for, Curtis?
Writing "Platform 9¾" on the back of your van cause you're a smart pedo.
Got the free hook Up, from this honeydip #thecodes #thewords #theways ya that me
yup, looking to do it through youtube...
And on yet another note, filthy black cock.
What is your plan NOT to end up in the 95%?
Tough loss for Marquette tonight, led by 17 with 13:10 to go at #9 Georgetown, lose by 3
thanks for the furniture recommendation! :)
I laugh at all of those gullible idiots.
awwe! Thank you! 💚
#shoutoutto now thers's a good chap right out of wales.
Mkay time to be active. Must go finish these grammar lessons for class, clean then read some more
Thanks, Asher. Can't wait to see you!
just a pawn that is all I am
Manno's Sports now -- Tickets to Muse / SSPU if you're smarter than _Begley at 8. Shouldn't be a challenge. Zing!
question:what choices do you actually MAKE?
lmao he looks like Al Bundy
good morning
RT : We are made wise not by the recollection of our past, but by the responsibility for our future ~ George Bernard Shaw
On set today with shooting the new print campaign for HGTV's Designstar!!! Rocking it!!
Hanging out wit timmy later.
Can't wait to see Ron Ron in OKC tonight... Malice at the Ford Center?
Uh oh it's drinking season isn't it?
Time to head to my DVR to watch The Office! Think I'm going to wind down with a Paulaner Salvator. :) yum
I figured as much. But welcome to America...continual validation of instant gratification. Will keep me working forever.
I especially enjoyed a shoot out scene towards the beginning. I thought it was shot and edited incredibly.
wish I was there to support the cause. Good luck today!
Brewers rolling on Opening Day.
That's the way it go
ah, just normal grits. word up. I love that idea. inspired me to have grits for breakfast!
Sorry to be missing this one... RT : we need to lead UP
I wished I could bby ,but I can't :c
It's up, you just have try again, it's very slow.
At least your day can only get better!!
The Casal Aveda Art Show went super!!!! Now it's time to gear up fir the Ward Bakery show April 30th + May 1st!
I realllyyy want to meet:
Omg u r so sweet and cute love u.aa lot
spotify should be set now
It's not your position in life; it's the disposition you have which will change your position.Dr. David McKinley
The missionary position is the position least likely to bring a woman to climax.
SKC with the WIN! Thanks to all my #SpotingKC boys & a special shoutout to !! Living the Soccer Hooligan Dream!
I think I may be the only person with parents that aren't on #facebook nor know how to tweet.
Finally watched Rise of the Planet of the Apes. A+
Soccer tonight. HERE WE GO!!!!!!
yeah you right about that I got a couple that i'm going to grab from you asap. good looking out
#SanfordFlorida police chief #BillLee to resign.
Everytime you retweet me, a little piece of journalism dies.
That's my city right there! South Central LA!
cool and yea cuz I went on a class trip and I'm exhausted
Bringin fire to the Boothe, like i'm an avenger for Abraham Lincoln (you have to be smart and know who Henry Wilkes Boothe is to get that)
While he at work ?
R.E.M. - collapse into now, SILVERSTEIN - Rescue, and SMASHING PUMPKINS - mellon collie & infinite sadness...
I really hate Michael del zotto right now...
Closing at 6 today...to head over to the Lakewood Cash Mob!!! We will meet at 7 at the parking lot on Madison and Carabel!
Christopher Columbus, one of Italy's most famous pastaphiles, was born in October, National Pasta Month.
All these 20th anniversary of "insert title of an album from the 90s here" tours are getting me excited for the eventual 2013 Cantaloop tour
Loving my NEW PLACE!!!
Well , I have disliked Bryce Harper in the past. I've been waiting for a reason to like Harper, and Cole Hamels gave me that
OK will do. Thanks!
lana del rey Is my idol , I hope someday ill be as beautiful and talented as her she sings like an angel:-)
Please Big Brother, drop out. Mark and Bopper are just too humorous to get the boot.
which raises the question, is it possible to find the record for that newspaper in your alma matter's library catalog
So cool! Heard all about your book on FLN on my way in to work. Can't wait to read it. We should chat!
In Miami today and the locals are feeling the cold at 64f, yesterday it was 82f.
Horse cops for tonight? What? Another great investment, Athens. Dumbasses.
You know; grown kids can become a pain in the rear sometimes.
Okay 2010, you completely kicked my ass. Uncle, already.
super soulful man!
Thanks! Congratulations, on the multiple LA Weekly Theater Awards nominations of 'The Romance of Magno Rubio'!
Muni's idea of time is hilarious - it's been 20 minutes since I started waiting for a T that was 5 min. away. Abandoning to take
My thing was when people began calling the tall, slender beauty standard a Eurocentric thing. Lmao, that was so wrong.
What do you think about a candidate who always says "I...I...I?" always says "WE," the hallmark of working together.
college is like American highschool right?
congrats bro ...deserved the win but i hate jacobs!
blocked me on twitter. Does that make me infamous?
is pretending it's the earring factory! :)
might want to check your acct got a personal msg from you with a link that is probably a virus.
Bcuz twitter is like a diary. knowing what you say is being read by someone can help relieve any stress you may have. Y delete?
yup u rite on that one MGK can rap
I'm not seeing enough in my stream!
So jealous of Matt Lauer right about now.
I'm curious about these "baby people." Who are they?
Thank you We wish you many great years to come!
hahaha thanks! Just kidding its all good in the hood.
« Lying to my face is equivalent to spitting in my face. I will punch you in yours.»
What an amazing day, thank you God!!!
I say brunch so white bitches can relate. I like tapatio all over my food
OMG. sounds great. <3 so excited, i think im in love with you <3
I don't want to gain the whole world and lose my soul-Toby Mac
The wife just mixed up Richard Simmons with Russel Simmons. :|
We love your work too!
Holy crap, Kim Jong Il!
thanks! They were awesome cars.
New wardrobe coming my way!!!
like porcelain baby.
Too comfy to leave my bed.
We had a very successful Rocktober, hope you did too. Happy Halloween!
WE appreciate the follow Kristi. WE Liked your FB page and WE're following back.
“: With OSU girls victory over OU, #OkState remains undefeated (9-0) in Bedlam this academic year." another Bedlam win, yawn
Will we be seeing you at our Launch Party? Thanks 4 mentioning 's guest post!
OMG... :X #madkudos2u MT : Tomorrow I am volunteering as a chaperone for the 1st time. Going to Carowinds w/ 300 7th graders.
Hahaha I will ask around! I am not sure who can design....Design friends: want to help create the Hip Roach?
You only have one shot
It was great to see check in last week!
Vegas or colombia??? Um
stressing out . >_<
auto copped either way, goodsir.
Well we can make it fun! Your ass is coming to #pride this year!!!
Paris, Madrid, London:) Hit these cities
I'm in your next session!
searching for a DIRECTOR of QUALITY with #DAIRY experience @ $120k
Hola and buenos dias to you. Best wishes to you for a great week. Take care and stay beautiful.
Thank you, Candice!
follow me monster .!!
Be good to yourself
Last day of The Boston Marathon expo today! Come by, grab some shoes and chat!
What a great guy! Ballsack
Man Your place or mine? Woman Both. You go to yours and I'll go to mine.
Velvet Red > Feed The Wolf > Velvet Red is a great segue.
Dining with the estimable , Ms. Tmi3rd, and tmi4th . Don't you wish you were me, , , and ?
yes. I was in love with him.
Perfection. Miss you two and Happy 2012!
There are certain colors that don't look good on anyone this early in the morning.
what are some good retro games??
I was thinking about it but ima just get 20's, I'm focused on my sound system right now though
Merry Christas folks! Tis the season to be a blessing!
I hope my friends know I do love Seattle—a big part of who I am. I am just critical w/ tough love.
I fell asleep soo early haha, I just can't wait for summer.
I can't find my iPod. Wahhh :'c
Watching #thevoice -Confused by the negativity, but I know this..I'd buy any of the last two shows of songs sung by !
#Expert Search Processed: #WrongfulTermination - #FTC #RedFlagRule - #Automobile Dealership - #CA (Contact re: Red Flag)
Thanx for the follow!
Los Angeles, California @ The Palladium June 24th Excited like hel !!!!!
ur welcome and have u ever luvd while at the same time ur fallin for someone else
haha!! You're smart!!! You will get it!
Causative factor is not based on symptoms, assessing the patient's CSOE is primary
don't forget your last chance to view #callandresponse is this week! thu-sat 1-5
Even thought I've never been to Bora Bora
"Hipster" is the new "poser".
Reports from #Syria: #Assad forces continue shelling the city of #Homs. Entire neighborhoods have been turned into rubble.
this is actually making me cry...i feel so bad for puck
1 WEEK! :D
Glad you enjoyed the #IDODI offices yesterday. Looking forward to Global Finals! 27 days left!
I have zero motivation to study for this micro exam.
DYK? Alexa Canady, M.D., at age 26 became the 1st Black woman neurosurgeon in the U.S. and is a member of DST ..
Want to see a great Broadway show? Go see the Godspell revivial! #Stuy Alum Ken Marion '66 is a investor.
Handing out FREE today !! What a great way to start the weekend off!!
Thanks for the follow! Yay! Hope you liked Season 2!
American economy recovering, growth, more jobs and still low house prices. So now its time to buy the deal of your lifetime
we've started adding mint to melon soaked in orange water
I'm glad you came ;3
Sexy! Even without your flesh...
tell me i help
anybody know of a good book on local boosterism in the 19th cent.?
text me sometime!
less shortcuts!!
Its so much shit that found out today.! It wuss very interestinq
i know it's only 6 there, but im not in san antonio so im tweeting now because here, its april 4th.
anything new Julie? How was your week?
Hey I'll be at the also. Had no idea another ux firm was in Florida. Where in Florida are you?
vacation reads i loved: THE AGE OF MIRACLES by Karen Thompson Walker. coming of age story, speculative fiction setting
Wieseltier "Spinoza thought himself out of Judaism. There's a history of this, Jesus being the most famous example."
that ain't ever gonna change! I'm just glad I live 30-40 minutes from him!!! :D
meeeeeeeep! 3,900(; ya'll are amazing. we love you guys so much!<3 x
Every restaurant should come with a pool.
Refreshing 2 hear a female rapping intelligently instead of rapping about deepthroating a Sprite can in her mouth.
So I'm thinkin ... Kings Island pretty soon... you in?
I'm not hungry, let's have dinner.
Good morning from Nashvegas! Anyone doing anything fun today?
Make it a point to request for the maximum allowable time to delay the process
well yeah because God gave us free will. But you have to have morals. Without morals you'll only make bad decisions. And that
the way it should be.
miss ya too!
I mad the Jv cheer team for highschool(: can I get a woot woot?(:
it's different then my pc but software I use is the same plus I got iPad iPhone iPod touch .... So I'll manage.
RT lmao (: When Girls Are ALWAYS Sad. <<<< just Cause You Have A Pussy Doesn't Give You An Excuse To Act Like One.
A shout out to our new followers! Hope you're all having a great weekend!
"You miss out on a lot by not giving things a chance." ~Shantara Kennedy
Rain rain go away! We have games to play!
No, already home to A-ville and using a Groupon at Adriatic
Tops on Twitter
please let us know when you serve up the south side again!
Hi! I'm the new chair of a Baltimore scholarship program & would appreciate the opp to chat briefly; I need some guidance!
LOL yea Yea
Happy Veterns Day!!!!! Thanks to all our soldiers that fight for us!!!! :)
she just don't understand..
Ifollowed your friend(: She's perddyy!
I might lol I might not ant no tellin
First African American lit, now Speech. I love my class.
If I didn't have the man above I wont have shit I thank you for everything
Smashed In. Milwaukee Hardcore. Check em out!
They have a signer on #TheVoice What deaf person would pay for a ticket to the finale show of a singing competition?.....#yolo i guess
I don't understand how people can call Xtina the "voice of a generation." They better not be talking about my generation.
Reminder! Today at at 4 p.m., Ron Carlson reads with Sandra Gilbert! He'll be signing Room Service, she'll be signing Aftermath. Go
Sent my no to ur yahoo. Don't wanna post online
Fashion Business Incubators (FBI)
Big game today the one everyone is waiting for vs that team in Topeka ..great day to be a hornet
Well put Michy! I haven't heard it yet.
SHUT THE HELL UP.
You lucky GMT bastard.
#IntDesignerChat Absolutely: it's the rest of the world that needs design!
Separate thought: How can doughnut and donut both be correct?
Another gorgeous day in DC
I get "Adam" as in Prince.
Baseball season is here! Improve you game and learn the secrets of base stealing
Is this your rendition of "Swipes on Swipes on Swipes" ? lol
Everyone Knew That ;D
Perhaps giving him a big hug instead would make you feel better.
Haha man.. between 2 papers, it was 14 stories the past two days. 13-hr day today. RT : Did you write all seven stories?
I feel you nigga, well I forsure wanna work with you niggas & see what we can make. i have protools in my head lol
Miss everything , I really did mess up and didnt even realize , but i'm going to fix everything and never let this happen again
encouraging #lpc to take risks
IN Quotes: "Self-confidence is the result of a survived risk."
I had fun with 😊
Tanner Bananer and Greyson Baby each chose a sister to sleep with lol :)
LOVE your Big Brand theme ! Where do I go to change font on template pages & stop flashing on rotator?
You call yourselve "JMo"=gag-free.
we should next week cuz I don't have basketball after school
What book will you be reading this evening? That is, if you aren't a football fan of course!
I'm pretty sure I just did about 500 pull ups.
lol omg how did you know!? And they sell toys <3
Jarrett: still necessary to bundle skills/knowledge, socialization, facilitation/instruction, and accreditation/certification?
see what happens with a little patience (and a shit ton of speed)?
Did a bit of Easter shopping with my boys, now home for some yummy Pei Wei!
We've been preaching that here from day one. Love it!
Today, I am at the Celebrating Mom! Craft & Vendor Show from 11am - 3pm at Ashton Place, 341 75th Street, Willowbrook, IL.
- thank you very much, Michael. I am just so very excited.
im so confused. I just ate a brownie
comes pretty close.
that was amazing.
"How I longed for word from home." OH
Some people understand the road to success & what it takes others dont. Those who dont: Im having a fabulous party at my beach house
man.... twitter trippin then.. what you do to it...? I know it was you.
Thanks Jen! Very sweet words ;)
Dear dc plants, no use trying to germinate in my nose. U r Definatley wasting ur precious spores & giving me the sniffs. Achoo, Aleksandra
Today, the average person in the United States drinks 9 fewer gallons of #milk on an annual basis than he or she did in the early 1970s.
And now for the Top 3...the 3rd Prize goes to Calcula!
2 different stores. 2 different fitting rooms. Mom asks their kid, "will they fall off when you're running?"
RT : Check out the LIVE streaming Social Media Sweet Spot web show today from Booth 231 @ 11 PT/2 ET
Man they aint no rhymes they are short poemd...lol
I got you today. I'll message you once I send them
Good morning. Stoppin' in to say hello and to wish you a great week. Take care.
UNI Students Say Cuts Eliminating Classes They Need - KCRG
RT : you should know as for earls i adore lord bergamot by
I can't keep
so right now my newsfeed is like "sarah falter shared a link 27million times"!!! hahaha glad you liked it so much :P
And, if I buy the bike online, will you cheerfully give me free advice on getting it ride ready?
it broke in my otter box
I'm sleepy
Also: and Kim Kardashian. Though that one makes sense.
#DontGetMeStarted and then stop. #Girl If you go #DownTown you better be ready to
On my way to the Las Vegas airport to head home to New York City.
oh yeah - my cauldron brethren and sistern will be in full voice come sat. Burn FCD burn!
Overheard at the State of the Industry session at
I hope every girl finds a boyfriend as great as mine :)
#WhenIFirstJoinedTwitter I had 0 followers for the whole year of 2009 LOL
No friends RT : nobody is texting me :/
Let's make it 3 in a row.
Two of my favorite phrases are: "Person of Interest" and "Delusions of Grandeur" - Twitter combines both.
$200oz's of Island Blueberry available.
Spokesperson. TV Host. Narrator. Actress.
nigga that's why is the realist.
Join our tele-town hall, starting now. 877-229-8493 PIN 19380. Bring your concerns and your questions. Let's talk.
Sure, we can do next Sun, 4/22. Does 11 EST still work?
When I wake up I can't never really just go back to sleep smh
Because I can't get enough golf today, now watching The Greatest Game Ever Played.
PLEASE FOLLOW ME!! WOULD MEAN SO MUCH <3 ! 6
Hey,How have you been?
bummer. wish you'd reconsider. paul is nothing like the others in GOPs
idk how i feel about this...
How do you know that? Maybe Obama would have loved to have gone. Maybe he wanted to dance to "At Last" with Michelle
If they're not long, they're wrong! ;-) Thank you! :-)
Aw yeah! RT : On the train home with bove, tiff & Happy weekend!
Friday was Club Amnesia. Monday was La Pomme. Tonight it's Club Perks. On Thursday its Club LQ. Night life
Congrats Josh! Much praise to God.
If another person calls me a jonus brother I'm going to kill a mother fucker!
> people who print 30+ pages on printers in the library... Fuck off
Thanks! Coincidentally had a bunch of blocked links last week, drove me nuts. Saw t.co and ow.ly, roadblock at odd short URL
Good Morning Tweepz!!!! Seize the day!!!
well thank you for cheering on the Devils with me! night!
sounds like a fun show
Four major banks control over 75% of the nations mortgage servicing. Wells,Bank of America,JP Morgan and Citigroup.
appreciate it bout to check the track u sent me in a sec
Every one just wants there own house hoe
I bet that if you're going through a hard time, Dwayne Johnson is a rock.
#IfWeAreInARelationship , You Shouldn't Care What Anyone Else Says .
Coming June 1, online graduate level, curriculum based legal, business and financial education for health care professionals.
the show is for two hours? thats long.
#ihavenorespect for guys who think thay r better then u
omg just followed me!! so happy!!! :D <3
Kids dont need to see all that RT : i dont understand people that wear pants around the house.
Thanks for the follow. Working on saving the earth, one artist and art lover at a time.
i posted a cute picture of us on fb. and imma post it on here too.
Jeffrey Zaslow, Author and Journalistic Role Model, Dies at 53
I love your site & read all reviews prior to any purchase. Any thoughts of an app flying around? Keep up the great work!
Standing desk. Pro vs Con. Go.
good morning ;) have a great wednesday
like u try to follow ppl who follow ppl baq tht follow u an this pops up over there>>> This User Does Not Exist
I had so much fun at the high school for the day the only thing is some of the classes were boring after!! & I saw the Guy I like. :)
HAHAHA yes PRE GAMING it!!! lol i am like soo extra hyper now that i am buzzin and listening to the jamss
Ohh and incase u were wondering. I dnt have a pic of my self cause i dont want creepers like u looking at me. ;) Okay.
UNICORNS UNICORNS UNICORNS UNICORNS UNICORNS
Being gay isn't wrong? Since when was it bad to love someone? #isupportgayrights. <3
And a hawk just landed in the #MtIda backyard. That was a little crazy...
please call this number 254-716-4646 Please its my friends birthday! :) She would be so happy! :) 63
She makes me so HAPPY! Working on the E.p and recording new stuff with the band this weekend O:Im pretty excited!
fountain of our youth to before and become yet again the thought of a race of angels living among us a few the light we will follow to
Hey there, the iPhone app crashes on me after the initial intro screen and gets half way through syncing. How should I fix this?
Just a hunch, but I don't think QB draws = Gopher victory
#XFactor was good. Chris was so freaking amazing! The guy with his pants hanging down.. not so good as well as that idiot girl who sucks xD
I keep thinking I should see about getting guest blog spots. Then I notice the tumbleweeds rolling across my own blog.
Seen Deliverance?
only 4 days left to vote for us to play Edgefest!
Recs2: St.Nachos series-Z.A.Maxfield, The Emperor's Wolf-J.C.Owens, Circe's Recruits&Dawn Endeavor series-Marie Harte
Being in the 20% blog. (go to www.daryldorsey.com)
What is all this devil worship stuff I am watching on the Grammys. A spiritual tribute to Whitney followed by a tribute Satan.
It sucks to be you right now
Oh perfect. I need a new email address to sign up for a geocities account. Oh...
Being truthful makes us worthy.
Just chilling on the patio
on it
I really had to punch on this Mexcan fool at work this mornin, bet he think twice before he come at me foul
lol I might go to bed soon lol it's almost 12a.m
There's no better feeling in the world than a warm pizza box on your lap.
in the spring so it is warrrrmmm. michael's visiting me tomorrow and it's freezing lol (¬‿¬)
It's funny I was watching the Fairly Oddparents and one of the characters for a little bit in the movie is Dash from Danny Phantom
Movies Mall Manis and Pedis running from Lori god I'm gonna miss summer :(
hm interesting! Will have to try as well...thanks!
Oo! Is there a video or was it live just now?
yeah i'm just curious. it's like aziz's best work, and a lot of it is based off that "funny things about being famous" bit
Thanks so much! Wish you could make it!
Bull Durham (see my twitter/blog name) ": What is your favorite baseball film? #MLBFC"
If you have entry level clerical, customer service, call center, housekeeping, data entry, and/or environmental services positions open at …
Who would like a Lyric Video to go along with our new single?
So, we're supposed to fly out in about 45 minutes...it's looking scary to fly right now at Will Rogers.
You mean to tell me Nikki & Victor are still at it? Was he the original singer of I'm in love with a stripper?
done ur turn!
i HATE the word mayonaise.. i hate the food more, but i cringe when i hear people say MAY-NAZE
Jimmy, please send us a direct message with your email address & we'll contact you.
It's not about having the idea. It's about believing in it.
I am soo in love :)
Why you blaming us bitch? I see how it is
thanks for using our clips :)
Just left a voicemail with the White House. Ha!
There is a pedophile next to me in the parking lot listening to the chipmunks.
happy birthday and good night:) jk who sleeps at this Time!!;)
prepping for Austin. Need to watch Slacker on the plane.
Is there any way you can check out an IPad from your division, or preview it at a local store?
i already got it RT : GTA San Andreas is on Xbox Live Marketplace for 1200 points
oh by the way, idk if you like it or not but I just made #ZendayaGotSwag up cuz it sounds cool!!!! :)
Brother in Sonoma says "hot and dry" -- then again, he's... unusual.
I will like to have sex with a black guy!! One day I will do! Thats a fantasy:))
“: the EMCCA exam” <-- Good Luck, you'll do fine!
I am thinking about it. I was just there for the event Sat. It is an excellent cause.
Obama fills in to coach daughters basketball team www.tncnews.com
Packers def will have a pass rush this year.
Watching my two favorite gingers unite right now and conan
Sitting completely still on I-85. Why again did I drive this week?? Think I could get to Macon faster if I just got out and ran!
Thanks Kelly! Glad you enjoyed it!
Hey you guys should tell your friends about us mmkay?
Power your nose, paint your toes, line your lips & keep 'em closed. Cross your legs & dot your i's, & don't ever let them see you cry. ❤
"Be the 4011th person to respond and you win Pens playoff tickets." ... "Sorry you are number 4008." WHAT IS THAT?!
Phones in both AOA offices are back in service. Thanks for your patience!
Fyi: buying a ton of tix doesnt increase your chances, you have more of a chance of becoming president
not sure
I like ur new set, but u can't see ur sign, " THE ROSIE SHOW"... I also love the colors on ur set, my fav. Color is purple.
If I slam this manila folder into the cabinet while singing BORN TO BE FILED I'll totally get promoted to CEO right
Shut up before I Tiger Woods your wife, Casey Anthony your kid, Michael Vick your dog, and Chris Brown your sister.
HAPPY BDAY ;)))* Have a great one<3
YEAHH BUDDY #GOAL! USA. all the way baby!<3
Can't wait for Wensday!! #BoyzAreBack 
“: My heart is riven”thank Lin still hoping to get to meet you in person
Crying myself to sleep
Have a great show tonight at the Hotel Indigo! Is it open mic?
HAHA! Tweet of the day! RT Parents, talk to your kids about grammar. Forget drugs and sex, they'll learn that shit on the streets.
i didnt make it for high jump but i still got the 400 and the 4X4
thanks for the vote!!
In 01 Casey Frank got one of the members of Kerosene 454's #. Him, , and myself called asking for live videos. Weirdos.
Man I need to spend some time at the #Gorge!
: wat would u like to eat n watch wat movie
Dang it's almost time 4 me to take the ACT got be dere @ 8!!! "Str8 Like dat"
I love the feeling you get from music.
Now that's RLD(double)F!
Massage therapy heals injuries, comforts sore and fatigued muscles and reduces stress levels.
ya better!
Leif Garrett performed Surfin' USA on American Bandstand on this day in 1977. I was a young girl in love!
:D You make me so #happy :)
I really never understand why the employers are so gender specific i.e,...Female preference for HR position.What lacks in men?
Read Bernie Miklasz' stuff. You okay Joe?
looking at all the lucky bitches who saw drake !
Wow, that is a great compliment. RT : you guys are hands down the best restaurant in town, looking forward to Chinato
We are running drum circles in Africa and Wash, DC follow us on Facebook,Drumming An End To Poverty.
I got Niggas scared to wear they All White Air Force 1's now.. Niggas know them Shits are Played the Fuck out!
Ready to be done with school, but not ready to move out and go home.
What is the most important trait an #actor can have?
Tony Robbins in Long Beach this week. His show starts this week as well. 2nd event to feature our Registration and barcode apps!
Game Night agrees with the Game that Lil B may be the Wackest Rapper, but he is better than any of us...
stop that! You ain't no good! Lol
Happy Mother's Day! Give your mother a hug today!
It's ideally suited to handheld gaming, IMO, and the localization is being handled by none other than Vic Ireland of Working Designs fame.
RT : When you give to others but start sacrificing yourself they become thieves.
#LintonAndAssociates wants to wish everyone a very Happy Easter!
Wow! The American Dream has gone up in 4 yrs. Well, not really, there's been a 70% increase in food stamp benefits. Let's blame it on Bush.
do u mean a gangsta or a nigga wit a bus pass
just got punk'd
Dont believe that! /:
She -Parachute♥
Living in a single again next year but gonna have a bathroom for once
Go take a fucking nap.
i need 99 more followers
I guess the refs got paid off on that shit
Great first day of #MissUSA working with sponsors A great group!
The should have Boston celebrities do the train stop announcements instead of that computerized guy. People'd get excited to ride
(: best time staying after skool ever!<3
Can't wait for our show tomorrow with American Fangs and Dev Electric!!!
that's what they said. I told them I can work anytime in the summer besides Saturday. Do you like it?
#np House Party (remix)
DAM followers like tweets of food truck days nearby, Sunday morn links to art news, other arts venues happenings.
I bet got his panties wet thinking about breaking the Noel story. I don't consider a meeting "Breaking News"
ATL SFE IS IN THE BUILDING Y'ALL AIN'T READY
ik but still and yea right when i was gonna buy a ticket it soldout
66% of men like to make the first move in a relationship
I love bumping into Ed, my 8th grade boyfriend. Reminds me that my dating choices weren't all bad.
Ahh, sounds perfect! : enjoying my Glenlivet 15 at thanks to Thanks!
The industry would rid you of your family if it's profitable
It helps when David raises 4x the cash of Goliath.
Don't you have something to do, somewhere to be? ;D
Merry Christmas Everyone!!!
Oh yeah. It's Friday, right? #ff Check em out this weekend at Middle East in Cambridge if you can!
Follow #SoSoDef Own
that fugitive dust is belligerent this spring.
peace! If you don't like it, don't buy it. using a tool a carpenter uses doesn't make u a carpenter
i may be from chicago but hey
Want me to email it?
The pics my dude likes on Instagram >
de nada! I had a call earlier w/ the creator of the campaign- Carla, a bright young lady
What an honor...thanks for the follow :)
you gonna bowl with us tonight?
Im Most Def.Gettin Clothing Line When It Cumz Out..! I Kno Itz Gone Be Some #Heat..!
U SuperMom ha
I know you'll find something to do maybe even doing more commercials
Thanks. Was trying to find a simpler, easier solution though. I love the Revert button in my PC version of QuickBooks.
Deandre Jordan offense is an 11 if he's further than 3ft from the basket
We're not here to convince you that we're ready to blow up... That's your decision. Don't regret it when you pass the opportunity though
Thanks, appreciate it!
aye, its hypocrite shawty over here and im proud bitch
It is not only fine feathers that make fine birds. -Aesop
OJ Mayo is about to burst into flames 🔥
EOC wasnt as hard as i thought it would be but still prob failed.
My cab driver brings me gum. Top that.
NM....recovering from a long night
When u unfollow me I will unfollow u lol
A tad bit hungover, I'm not gonna lie lol
UNITED NATIONS (AP) -- UN approves resolution threatening sanctions if Sudan and South Sudan don't halt violence.
Lol an we're going back to your house, right?
genius. thanks
Miley Cyrus ♥
Getting a new deck on my house.
too far
Lookin' so bomb, gon' find me a honey ;]
I lost a "mask vs. hair" match to so I had to unmask.
yeah man !!
Guys wanted to offer me less that my chip Icm to give equity to CL I declined after consulting with Deeb. Got 3rd anyways for 115k. GG gn
Thanks! It's my first, like, official thingy. I hope people enjoy it!
I think i'm black swannin it tonight...........
follow me and I'll dm my email
I have 80 influential users following me: , , ,
that certainly is a risk factor and I didn't think of that. My admin were often behind the curve.
will do, thanks so much for passing along :-)
Hi, great to connect with you! Please let me know if you would like to read any of my work. Best, Matthew
okay's twitters
The #Clippers have some of the worst body language of any team in the #NBA and it starts with Blake.. Not good coming from a young guy.
be safe
More slide decks and video will get posted on the #eduiconf download site next week. We'll keep you posted.
Memory contestants use story to win, per Joshua Foer. So it should be no surprise that story is what makes a #TED talk memorable.
So I know there will be a lot of #SuperBowl tweets but I CANNOT WAIT.
There are sponsored WiFI hot spots in the convention center and in my preconference room. WiFI in the Marriott lobby.
This just in: Irene lacks birth certificate, North Carolina residents prepare for the worst.
"Is this a hitnrun!?!"
Have a blessed night. Good night :)
On Vacations......almost time to go back home....damn! means got to go back to work!
He just wanted you to taste his strudel
Oh, the sabres must be playing then
And it was a great momentum swing :)
Just got back.
Crimson's undefeated streak lives on. Damn.. Guess no marking out from me tonight. Eric Young is still the man!
a lot is two words babe.
imma kid what about you
I wouldn't have raised Burma--far too tenuous.
Who wants to help me get an ass!? Lol
O MY GOSH!!!! O_O your SO close!! Ah! I can't wait! #MARSPARTY!!!! lmao!
Q3) Each group within an organization needs to curate their own material.
You guys killed at at #Ultra2012 #Miami #UMFTV !!
There's a tall and handsome stranger on top of me--but he's imaginary
Someone bring me coffee.... Ill love you forever.
According to , Dick Cheney consumed the heart of a wild boar in a satanic ritual and will live through the next harvest.
First Tuesdays w The Midwest Independent Film Festival screen LAST RITES OF JOE MAY (Dennis Farina, Steppenwolf) Tues Nov 1st!
aw!!! I miss you Lombardy!! My old balcony!! :(
Oh (S)He is So Cute;D
Fucking bitch brings a cat home knowing im allergic to them -_-
Trinity announcer Mike Guetig has been selected to run the shot clock at this years Men's Final Four in Indianapolis (via )
My head hurts so much from thinking
I followed Thanks! click here: www.youtube.com/kaebelltunes
I'm drained of all my energy, i'm ready to sleep. xD Night y'all :D
what up! Harlem checking in with you
Good to know, thanks! That'll really add to the festive feel of the conference.
i'm doing very good, wet right now (its raining here) but good. You?
Wow! I'd never ask anyone to do something like this. Any friend who asked me to do this wouldn't be a friend much longer!
ah i cant wait!!! temple run 11 hours staright.? yeah i think so. :)
It's not often you get a request from host of #MeetThePress for a weather forecast ...but I did... hope it helps. Good luck!
Streaming Terabytes of goodness for our clients
Thanks! Been reading yr stuff in the Post. Great stuff!
And oh yea melo has 40
Had 2 share: "Rumors are carried by haters, spread by fools, and accepted by idiots." Be good to those around you. Pay It Forward #Friday!
": I wanna go too!! 😜👯" omg! My Dreena & Gina! That would be da BEST night eva w Margs! :0
We're in the same session!
I like how Puck says pathetic.
Was going to leave around 5pm until I saw initial weather reports last night and figured 2pm was safer. I'll stick w/that :-)
So the internet is out at work. What to do???
hey i have a question would you mind answering for a new band just starting out??
Teaching with #moodle or powerpoint? #safarimontage allows custom media playlists and creates web link to insert into presentations
For all conversation about "RETAIL" real estate, join the conversation at #RetailRE - See you there.
because they have nothing better to do than try to be God.
Just meditating on God after a long day, God is super gracious. I used to be a slave to sin, now I'm free! AGTG
Thanks so much for that. Inspector Tay is one of my favorite characters, too. Expect a new Tay in the fall.
Again, not surprised. With a sharp tongue like hers I don't get the sense that she is warm and fuzzy in public situations.
Yup, thats a #DCDrinkUp! RT just explained how the #GRAIL spacecraft work. Over dumplings and sticky rice.
PLEASE WIN CAPS
will do bro appreciate it!
Me too, for sure.
Polishing the next FlashCards++ update... should be ready to send to Apple within a week or so
You've got mail...
Rest in Peace Dick Clark! New Year's Eve specials won't be the same without you!!
I'm wearing khakis and I'm the only other person in casual clothing besides the owner who is wearing like a nine piece suit.
Is the jersey shore cast in Italy right now?
How much time we spend with God is determined by how much we depend on Him.
Not for another 5 more seasons.
#TIIP4P Gen. Rick Lynch, US Army "Vision w/o resources is just a hallucination."
Was just talking abt you. Yes! And to hang. It's like 400lbs. I'll find out what time today for tmro.
#psanderettememories when you followed me the best day of my life
NEED new wiper blades? We can help! All stores open till 6pm. Drive safely!
Hiring 2 Front-End Web Developers. looking for someone who is an expert in writing JavaScript, jQuery, CSS and HTML, need to be able to wri…
Line is moving but there's lots of people at the Naca mortgage fair.
Rethinking that noisy neighbor thing...
Stop thinking about your health… and it will go away.
There is a naughty boy in lots of men (like Greg and me) that needs his pants taken down by a no-nonsense lady (like you).
hey I draw stick figures ;) please dnt tell me u fuck the little kitties xD
just sounds like something my girls would say!!
TY and Happy
oops spelled awesome wrong, sorry
I'm beginning to think my couch is breeding them...
That's sad.
Alright, I'm out. We'll come out swinging tomorrow. Don't forget to
An aluminum can that is thrown away will still be a can 500 years from now!
can we get you guys out on time warner chan 36 to be interviewed ?
he's too inconsistent to be a starter. I try to love all denver players but he has no heart or drive
Why do people have to ruin a perfect relationship everythings fine until 1 person comes and ruins it all
Thank you pandora for keeping me company all night
Well, Google Play appeared in a startling (and kinda awesome) way...
Data is a means to an end; it's a means to a better decision.
Damn today was a good fuggin' day
RT : RT : you don't need to defend the Lion, just open the cage.
Celebrate endings...for they precede new beginnings. ~Jonathan Lockwood Huie
Donna Summer too?? Lord have mercy.
-Happy Platypus Day! :D
LOL. That happened quickly. RT : Update: "We've ended our freelance relationship" with Sarah Phillips, ESPN spokesman says.
I want a Krabby Patty! Spongebob makes them look delicious when they show the realistic one 💜
No prob. It was tough, interesting, frustrating, and fun all at once. In the end I'm a better artist because of itsoTHANK YOU
Latest HerbalGram journal is out. The Cover article is "Replacing Animal-Based Remedies with Plants." Check it out at www.herbalgram.org.
> Highly educated and experienced Recruiters dedicated to meeting Employer's needs
My shadow days are over
Discover #LincolnPark 2012 is at the printer!
Follow #thatcamp for ideas on unconference sessions! MT Wow, so many great proposals coming in! Keep em coming.
oh yea i hope they dont!
Miss her </3
I had final cut for a time but it was for Mac
not much here and u
France is really kickin it up a notch in the action movie department.
Beautiful Day here in Kansas City.
I will lol
Wow what an ending to the hawks game lol... Wtf did smith do?? N wtf did rondo do?
Awkward moment when neither one of us can spell it.
- Now the horns are hooked for good. Blowout!
Happy New Years Everyone!!<3 *2012*
Our Charter cable is again not working. Hasn't worked right in 3 months. Not in to wasting another hour on the phone either. Terrible!
I was thinking that myself. I see him trying to copy the morning show a little.
thanks playboy!
I keepa bad ass niqqa name
well, im guessing no plans tomorrow. hmu?
Bumping some while driving on sunset in los angeles
Wow can't believe #whitneyhouston is dead...so sad she had an amazing voice
don't you luv my instagram skills? sry for not calling back this weekend- will try tonight before #Smash! xx
Fresh strawberry shakes will brighten any rainy day!
I have no idea. To be honest. And what are you loling about? XD
#somewhereinthehood theres a crackhead tryna sell some head and a cheeseburger for some spare change...
has 6 teams running the Corporate Cup! Last year they won $4000 for the Children's Hospital Foundation.
Gelato too?! Couldn't be happier.
Just watched the pilot of "Whitney" the TV show... it was hilarious!! Definitely recommend
Tell everybody who loves dance in DC to follow on twitter - we will announce a lot great program and concert information here
RT : Can drop a sandwich and make it land jelly side up.
so great to meet you! I will definitely pop by and check it out xoxo
Don't like Carl Edwards right now. That was just wrong. Glad Brad K is OK.
I sure am!
lol to much info
New QB Javelle Allen threw a jump pass across his body while running to the left sideline for a TD in todays Intnatl Bowl
Bitch either you did or you didn't jus DON'T lie
did you make?
Every worthwhile endeavor starts with passion.
I thought I was going crazy when I woke up from my dream. But I'm already there so...
Do you guys know what 's viddy account is??? Or is he keeping it private???:) PLZ TWEET ME IF U KNOW!!:) #muchlove:)
is going to make sure that those that don't have twitter, are getting one today!
I heart the rocks that let me kick them along with me on walks.
I like when the #cataloging rules support what I want to do.
I was there, earlier, coulda hung out
Aar River Gallery in #Westminster presents "Looking Inward": The Art of John Warren, First Friday opening reception tonight from 6-9 p.m.
Thank you for #FF !!
Me and the bro watching this starless ass Bulls game smh
ypo I have a craving for ice cream
Thug Life??? ": As a teenager, Tupac was a ballet dancer."
I like math all I do is get the red mark on my forehead from sleeping lol
Don't understand why second-base umpires hate Michael Bourn so much.
hey there I see you are in town. Did some work on my website so email was down. Let's get togther, yeah yeah yeah...
What's the meaning of the index passed to the draw callback in a script deck?
OMG I WAS KIDDING WHY ARE RANDOM PEOPLE LIKING THAT
Wow, even Richard Evans is on twitter!
Happy International Women's Day! Get inspired and celebrate your accomplishments, ladies!
I apologize. I forgot I was signed in to his account. My bad. He wanted a twitter. smh
The poor man is not he who is without a cent, but he who is without a dream. Harry Kemp
Giovanni and me afterschool , haa we had an interesting conversation . ! <3
There is some serious design innovation at the Delta terminal at DFW. Anyone know who did it?
I love how Glamour magazine has so much more content! Especially love the real life pieces (Top Ten College Women) so inspiring
There is a (very remote) chance that I'm rocking out to AC/DC today because of Iron Man.
I'll do it now...watch and learn
Suddenly I felt a misty consciousness & I somehow knew that w-a-t-e-r meant the wonderful cool something that was flowing over my hand....
I want one!
call me ASAP 6023215619
4hrs Till youu Go For Canada ,are u excited?(: please follow me.
I never get on anymore haha
it's not even worth it!!
i have learned my lesson.
The shorter my hair is... the bigger my nose looks. Damn this Espinosa curse!
school tomorrow ): well, it was nice not having school monday or tuesday(:
SLIM!!! come visit us in the kuntry!!!
Get references on your HR application vendors! Be sure the one you pick can cater to the size of your company.
lol..im done lets go
#ff some of my favorites
bought my mommy flowers, chocolates, an I love mom magnet and a spa package for mothers day. THEN had them delivered to the house 😊
1) Vote to raise debt ceiling 2) Glad to see you finally joined the Twitter. Might want to rethink alias.
Holy shiznitpickles i just checked my voicemail only to find out i have a job offer . =]]
Manimal in beast mode
What cematary are u at? Its beautiful...
Our browser-based version is optimized for Android. No native app—it's tricky because of screen size fragmentation on that platform.
Great example of use of mobile tech: Fresno Bus Tracker using to report on transit reliability.
Omg this is late but i love tht song!! i bet the cover is going to be amazing!!
you shudup slut !
im not gunna lie. i really want to drink
RT : Limbaugh just lost the one of his longest running advertisers, the online dating site NaziMingle.
this more than a rivalry to me. it's pure fucking hatred.
Hey. McVaney isn't in the directory box.
Fucks with a bitch that watches the playoffs.
She thanks you for that!
Oh, fantastic! has drastically changed the way I approach...well, everything. You'll love her!
whoever is doing the morning show at wdae is going to end up making drive of the skyway.
Good Morning World. Make it a productive and wonderful day!
So I guess I'm now a person that irons my Oxford shirt at 7:30am so I can wear it with a fair isle sweater and not look sloppy. Really punx!
tell that to Peyton!
LUCKY. OH MY. SO LUCKY
Sometimes I love surprises
Both scare me.
Nothing but love-your team is its own team. You'll show the true red, white, and blue when it matters. Championships will come.
and hopefully also passion and joy -- if you make it through the turbulance :)
That dump on the NW corner of 30th St and 6th Ave, 1 flight up, was cleaned out. It was a clip joint, selling liquor without license. [1944]
"Like" this post if your are browsing Facebook on a PC right now!
imma hit her with my magic :) imma see her in school 2ma
dude you just need 4 more!! :D
now following brandon ellis :)
& because there are universal truths that can help all moms & moms to be like me.
Maintain throughout each season. Regardless of variety, roses require year round maintenance
We would love to tour through Kansas! We drove through there on our last tour but didn't play... haha
Glam red carpet WOW stunning actress model Miss California, star of ABC’s playing bad girl Lulu Pope.
smart man! ;)
Love knows no boundaries and no distance, miles and obstacles mean absolutely nothing in the face of love.
Push to start
Hi Chandra! Thanks for the retweet. :) Hope you're having a terrific Tuesday.
Lol She is in a better mood now(:
OMG. why am I always hungry 24/7?!? I need to stop eating so much.
What the fuck ...
Of Corse! Lol they tryna make me the Manager Already!
Ah, so I see, now. CakePHP 1.3 does ACL completely differently than the previous versions. Do your own tables and let automagic take over.
POUR SOME ALOE ON ME!
Single most important moving task complete: Cable install is scheduled.
According to a Baltimore sports reporter I won't name, when a team has a 5-3 lead, they are "steamrolling" the other team. Wow.
i'm from australia..:)
Google, you continue to out-do yourself. Love Mashable's quote "the world's collective productively takes a sharp plunge on this Friday".
RT : I use tests more for pre-tests so I have a better snapshot of what I need to teach #edchat <--why test if it doesn't inform?
UCLA's spring game was scheduled for Saturday May 05....yes
Just saw Ryan from , now it's a party! Can't wait for this meet to kick off!!
Tonight's special: bacon-wrapped dog, served in pita w/ nacho cheese dip and a side of spicy potato salad!
Happy Birthday Avril :D
"The Mayor ordered all city agencies, departments, bds, and comms to make data.. available to the public."
It would be a nationwide "ghetto party."
When winter weather strikes, strike back!
One Direction is coming here to Washington next year
Since when is your nickname Nay Nay girl? Lmao
haha that's you that does that!
Hey guys, Sorry it has been a few days since our last post but we have been busy with the website...we are almost there!
g i like this new one better cuz it aint as dark. lolol
I'm giving free skin care evaluations today in the Plastic Surgery dept. today at the Cleveland Clinic Avon open house. Come see me!
don't tell me what to do! ...i mean, next time! There will be so many next times!
RT : this is d - roc biggie smalls friend i just add u on my page--->Word? U shld let my homie know
so much amazing happens when you combine money + creativity + hedgehogs
Not tezting today \(^o^)/
Fucking with my feelings isn't a 'joke'.
Ooh dang! Do you have a cover for it?
Very nice of Peter Gammons to call out baseball bloggers on Boston sports radio. Stay classy, bud.
I can go for custard...custard not ice cream
and the moment you've all been waiting for, Sal wins the pierogie race by the length of a frying pan.
#edu11 Big themes: mobility, from the impact as devices come in, to presentation as we develop apps and mobile web sites, and the strategy
RT : "When you define yourself by your competition, you limit your vision to the extent of your competition."
You are an animal providing AFL fans precious information! The AFL dictionary!
Final panelist, Lydia Loren from Lewis & Clark revisiting the orphan metaphor: abandoned, misused, abused
Ya Allah I wanna Your exceeds expectation miracle !!! Only miracle !!!!.
thanks bro! I appreciate it
ahh geez you're going to make me blush - well we appreciate you taking the time and spending the money.
thank you!
Thank you nielsen for the two bux. I spent it on beer, and no... I won't send you your quiz or whatever this thing is.
#Plano trivia: What pizza chain opened their first restaurant in Plano? *First to answer correctly wins a Starbucks gift card!*
Tied series!!! Congrats !
dude what's going on??? Lol
Facebook=killing positive nostalgic images of people from past who really should have stayed there...admired friends become sexist, hateful.
We've marked a bunch of items down at DT2. Anything green-tagged is 25% off... that's about half the store! Brave the snow and say hello!
“: So glad I'm a #Gemini. #GeminiPride” you are so dead on with your tweets, keep it up
trying so hard not to fall asleep right now
Been honored2work with and for some great people these last 6 years...the name on the front meant something to them&it showed 2day
say no more homie..just link when u can
3D makes EVERY movie better!
Q: How many helicopters does it take for White House aides to go play a round of golf?A: Depends on how many were photographed.
off for a little while . hopefully when i get back on i'll have more followers <3 love you
Almost 70 degrees in February, let's get outside and enjoy it today!
anytime! And rounds like s perfect breakfast!
Not a bad view! Badger nation will be there to join you in a few days!
yeah. a couple times. but usually its just a <3 or like idk.
Headed to King George to be with Pern, & Bushel of whole crabs waiting and doing some party planning!
So PROUD of my best friend for that unassisted triple play <3
guyshh CHECK OUT MY WORLD ON GOOGLE HAVE A LOOK AT MY PICS ... :D
working but that's ok
at HQ working with on detroit's localwiki, alongside a graphic design intro class!
My team flopped out of the playoffs so I won't complain about the Miami Heat.
Hey guys i'm selling my mac book, And it comes with secret unreleased songs.
Go Bonnie :)
": I'm almost pretty. Lol"<<<< you are very pretty
Retweet this if yu LOVE YUR FANS!!! because we support everything yu do and love yu no matter what! Yur so inspiring to me and othersIFLY 3
Jogging home so I make it back in time for
TeamiPhone or TeamAndroid... bberry is amazing until it dies :/ mine only lasted a year had to order a new one...
“: I just wanna #FHBO RT : I just wanna dance..” YES me too!! Haha
aw haha and that's so sweet! :) *giggles* ": Hey, your birthday is comin up. :) I miss you."
nah, not my fam.....ill get her back...ill jus drive her crazy..thats easy for me to do!!!
Necessary Rant: One of my students wants to make a compromise in regards to her grades...meaning I raise it and she gets happy...
Time heals all wounds.
aww!! We heart you!!!
It feels good to be ME!!!
snow in philly this weekend... im not pleased
Awesome last Friday practice of STRYKE
#ArentYouTiredOf getting in a cab and saying follow that car! But you have to wait for Rebecca Black to decide which seat to take katt willi
Society has trained me, and others like me, to live in fear.
Thanks for the follow! I heard your beat changed. What stories are you covering now?
Nah, Carter has a spare. Just dunno where mine went and it's bugging me. Thanks though
. TY for follow!
what'd you break it in with? Heart and Soul, or good ol' Chopsticks?
#cwebodymedia What does tour Tebet market segmentation look like? Which of those customers is your target customer?
Which dessert did you enjoy on Friday? :)
LMFAO! hm.... Not really :D
just because Sandusky was a former PSU coach doesn't mean 2nd Mile was a PSU organization so how is this relevant? Cont...
happy birthday ttw
Aw hush! Lol
this speaks volumes about you my friend!
Olympic 7s bore me for some reason but I gotta get the 6s
Huge thanks to and for having us out to ATT Altitude Gym last night. Great event and a great Gym!
Cheers 2 - I received #SaulBass book c/o in mail. Thanks again! It's ah-mazing & so #inspiring!
Fine, you better call!
Main Reason: Her appointee to Public Safety Commission: Mike Levy. He is incompetent. She will not replace him.
|#quotes The only question to ask yourself is, how much are you willing to sacrifice to achieve this success?
Pictures of the little brother?
Sorry about the site being down. Again. Its back up now, order away
Time to get some work done.....goodnight Twitter
Drix, you know you love it!
little harsh?
...and this one belongs to the #Reds!
well he was one of the original jailblazers ..
RT OT Rule 1st team score win...#49ers win the toss...
hey OMGWire, are you still looking for staff writers?
Most underrated rap album:
why wont u follow
cool Thanx. Gonna look into that
In short, "Mad Men" is taking a lot longer to grab me than, say, "Friday Night Lights" or "Breaking Bad" did.
Feathered February! One Week until SQUAWK starts! get your tickets now!!
interesting, I wish I was there instead of the mixtape panel
I think I drove off in margarita with your car in my hand but in not sure what happened to your car.
Angela Carter is awesome
are you now comparing yourself to Marat? Really? I mean, Really?
Getting 2 dogs from NM next week from a high kill shelter. Hoping to find both GREAT homes...trying to do my little bit for the homeless...
This #movember shirt is going to be epic!
I love you too, boo!
for sure I'm free! why the 17th?
Haha just txt me
OH : Membase = data corruption at scale
NEW! The Science of Presentations With Dan Zarrella
Realizing the power of language. Infuriated a woman by saying "Uterus" and "fuck" at the OBGYN today. Seriously?
Good morning! We're open at 11am! SW 9th and Alder.
today is my daughters birthday! ! Have a great day everyone!
Jake, are u gonna make it? Do u want a McChicken? -
haha oh believe me I want a day off too but if you take a day off somebody will pass you and beat you that's what I think haha
Okay. Must go eat...later
"Love isn't a word OR action. It's an idea. And—when this IDEA is understood, we express it in the most creative and intuitive ways! —DJ T&B
If & I worked as hard on writing an article abt libraries as playing DrawSomething, we would've easily written a masterpiece
the iPhone app works on the iPad.
twitter on my Iphone is way easier then on the computer..
All I know is that it is so hott!!! Anyone agree?
Just in time for winter! I'll still get some sunlight, even if it's dark(ish) when I arrive and dark when I leave :)
End your day with something to be thankful for...helps you to sleep better.
This school day needs to fly by. I have plans. <333
Most cars have a sticker in the drivers' door that tells the weight of the vehicle
LoL yes draw all the fandom related things! LoL Ugh once I can word it out then I'll be happy to vent, its stuck right now *Hugs*
Are you wondering if #p90x works??
I can't watch this contortionist. Gross!!
no you're wrong. Im right! ^.^
So, I've been getting my mentions hella late, WHY?
Quick question: on a scale of 1 to 10, how often do you go to any page on the Yahoo! site (including the search function)?
Monster Rain...remember...Monster Rain...you will get through this!!!
Had great time's in the BX last night!!
Half the time I feel like saying
im so very sorry 2my bestiieee i cant hit u up rightnow cz idont got a phone nor labtop =(but ill xplain l8r cuz im in class
#MaximumBeadle What does Rex Ryan need to do in the #Jets locker room, to get them back to the playoffs and back on track?
Man we arguing like we still together WTF!
10 days of class left!!!
(Yes I'm going crazy with ticket buying now) I just got tickets for M. Ward at 9:30 Club on 5/13/2012: on
Dear "Nob Hill Corp", your San Mateo & Constitution location makes your use of the 1st two words suspect
lol yeah he IS sexy (; haha
how far did you run man?
After i finished calling for the 1000000000000000th time my mom was like "im scared of how much ur phone bill is gonna be" lol
...BTW...I'm at Mamma Sbarro's(The one we ate at last year)In NYC =)
Thanks! It's about time, eh?
haha- I got some work for u! Work for me! An just hold out for the warm weather! It's coming on Wednesday!
Its time
Teacher:I need an example of an interger(-). Kid: -69 Teacher: What's an example of positive? Me: +69 . Teacher: Enough with it!
the way my cat is adoring me right now really just means he wants food :(
your like an Indian summer in the middle of winter ..like a hard candy with a surprise center.
oh yep I've been pretty good had my ups and downs though
I got my camera today, this is so cool, thank u for doing this!
Hannah Montana
aint nothin like a good high
I have 781 followers and none of them retweet my tweets.
That is wired. I've never seen that. Gross
I need to go to new orleans
Having Fun With Yaheyra And Ebony. ^-^ <3
See why the fuck are you asking me where I'm from. Like if I really wanted your ass to know I'd turn on my location...
u r special ur my kind of special:)
just saw your movie never say never and I must admit I was impressed... Blown away your story really touched my heart.
Goodnight Beautiful people <3
Twitter is still showing my old user? This is annoying.
21+ ICON FRIDAYS: GLOW PARTY SPECIAL EVENT FT DJ REFLEX, , , D-NICE DRUMSET, &
Just got a long overdue cut from at Bang U st. Looking good for the summer heat in DC!
dj just described musician as Chilean Bob Dylan. I should pay more attention when the radio is on.
YES INDEED! Maybe a little Bmore fun :)
Sweet. You need to be the tip of the spear for Paleo promotion.
50 cent beer night tonight starting at 5pm. Time to get out and enjoy this beautiful weather while it lasts!
#HalfNelson movie....interesting
how'd the haircut/grade end up? Twit pic?
No work today! I would be giddy about it, but my sinuses are so stopped up, I can't freaking breathe! :-(
« « Any fool with a dick can make a baby but, only a real man can raise his children»»
#Revenge time..I love this show!
Just found a bug wherein 9,000+ mysterious AJAX requests are fired, for no apparent purpose, in under 30 seconds.
hey Cinders. For a short film possibly filmed in LA.
Calibration is the key to print, we calibrate our printers every two hours or when we change a roll. How often do you ?
Grind4Success= Maturity, Dreamer, Faith, Focus, Determination, Dreamer, Integrity, but most of all HARDWORK
Just found the song of my life!!!! #score!!
You should cite yourself! RT your own report and build that brand! :-)
Can't believe this semester is already coming to a close
Not even bothering to check my geometry grade. I know i failed.
tryna go see that new #americanpie tonight. shit looks like its gonna b great
I'm watching the game right now. I don't have any plans and I'm not sure I want to go out. What are you doinst?
Anyone wanna buy a spectator pass to #MLG Anaheim? I'm not going to be able to go. It's $35, which is what I paid for it. I swear. :-)
Not only am I playing at the acoustic on the 19th, but so is ! Come down and see us play some music for the MTG :)
in Focused learning community meeting trying to find common definition of "mobile learning"
FX is going with a space theme today... Lost in Space, Star Trek and Planet of the Apes. Where the Space Jam?
Find out what’s happening, right now, with the people and organizations you care about
If only.
wow. You're my hero right now. Congrats on Shark Tank!
Are you kidding? You would make more money by selling tank-tops...this is the desert...sheesh!!!
1000 followers! #HellYes special thanks to ALL of #TeamYes Love you all!
got my acsessories for halloween, and i saw lida, sergio, and na'breona at halloween city. love ya'll.jk
Almost 100 (and growing) here protesting the USC master plan and EIR [Figueroa and Expo] before USC 6pm event
i think i have a self-distribution strategy... maybe? more when i flesh it out better
love census indexers with great handwriting!
I feel like crying omg I love him :,)
RT : Confused about Twitter? Ask your VA to teach you and help manage your account.
haha, we think that might finally get BoA some Props. ;)
Remy seems to think he's a pug!
I love my girlfriend
The “best” college for a student is not necessarily the most prestigious, it's the one that offers a student the most opportunities.
Am I the only one who had an out-of-body experience listening to on #Idol tonight? WOWZAPALOOZA!!!!!!!!!!!!
thanks for calling me today. Made me feel ❤👍 see u tomorrow
District Track meet at Woodlands today!!!
Isn't it obvious that Kim has no skills or talent and she needs to be thankful she's got a man (with a lil' money) and Kandi to help her?
Murray State is a very good team, but profile suggests a 6 seed. Nothing to be ashamed of.
As a wise Jedi once said...*get off twitter & get your rest*
Junior Seau committed suicide? If that's true its very unfortunate & it goes to show that u never know what may be going on w/ someone.
CandySwipe nearing 2 million game plays since its release in December!
lol no just nails
#15peopleilove #2 even though she beats me...
Click www.souncloud.com/djdmannyc listen and enjoy!!
#gumroad is brilliant. Who said all the great ideas were taken? Gumroad.com
Tuesday is ladies day! $10.00 off any oil change, we come to your office, business or home.
It's a big deal in that we operate like we're Belton. That's all.
get the Pacers inked on your bicep, the Kings inked on your head, and the Lakers inked on your ring finger
sounds like fun haha
#AutoRepair When the Car Wonâ € ™t Start
If you're going to Opening Day, leave now.
Are you for Obama's United Socialist States of America?
Hey Jason...thanx for the RT!
give a little time to me, we'll burn this out.
36k at first break from 20k starting stack in MGM 1600 main.
#GABF winner Two Tortugas Belgian Quad preview tomorrow 1 keg goes on until it's gone.
Twinsies say thank you!
Obama strategists are predicting it now. Guess it all depends on what the economy does, and doesn't do.
wait. what? I thought we were open for business. I was told that small business owners would rule the world. weird.
know you've been in bltmore for awhile when you see an unlocked bike parked in another city and stare in awe.
u at work
very well put.
RT : We feature some of the best #blogs in
Merion mercy !  best school ever ! I went there for a tour and loved it <333
just got a press release that began: "hello [first name]." gonna be a good week, it seems.
The Ultimate Fighter sucks this season! I can't wait until it goes international. We will see fireworks then for sure.
today is 'National Train Day'
LOVED IT and loved that her husband supports her also. RT : How did y'all feel about Viola's 'do? Gasp in horror? Admire her ...
As of this morning all City Council members will likely adopt legal opinion of the Law Dept and not include the D3 map.
RT : Well behaved women seldom make history.
I saw the love of my life last week and felt nothing
Thanks to and @ for retweeting the news of the ghost conference with their followers. :)
In their wisdom, the Founders provided us with a 2nd Amendment allowing us to shoot any big mouth, motherfucker invoking the 1st Amendment.
Still some availability for November & December, discounts apply!! orangegrovesvilla.com
ok have fun:)
Definitely and keep Fields as well. He's pretty good too.
Our bird feeder is now attracting cats AND rats. Should one cancel the other out?
Time is never wasted when you're getting wasted.
predicting 18 holes in one! Woot!
Sounds like you're getting caught up in your lies.
Yes ma'am! :) Warrrrmmmm down here too
when you get a moment, DM me where to resend press kit for interview. Love you much!
Lessons from #WMNatSec : Gender bias: women can be labeled as “support” Need to toot your own horn. Make others aware of your resume.
*snort* Keep your snoogers to yourself.
Seven days without ones love makes one weak
Just landed in LA for the week for work.. Already saw Far East Movement
Thx for the reco. RT If you're looking for a great place to eat, The Prado.. is in the park. Excellent food.
HEY TJ! :D
#breakfastclubsmoke is trending! I don't understand the smoke part, but break a leg to everybody in the cast today <3 love you all!
Can someone in the UI/UX world PLEASE explain why apps & websites still read "username" during log in when I'm really submitting my email?
- I got things to do and not argue over this foolery <<<< No excuses for Kobe, just like Lebron
sorry. Some ur undergrads junk article on wind power in the newspaper. We shall respond
return to work set for 5/10. still in shock here. much to do while brain is foggy. Ms.15 with her dad, house is quiet and new normal far off
They say that quitters never win.
OMG HE NEEDA HURRY UP AND COMEE ON..!!!!!!!
I visit you daily, tell you volcano will destroy your island next year, offer free ticket for ship to escape, but you decline? God is Love
In the lobby for a drink. Can't believe how warm it is at
read this
Dark chocolate lovers can try Mo’s Dark Bacon Bar which uses 62% dark chocolate than milk chocolate
watching other artists live shows is inspiring as hell
That's right you will! :) RT: Silly class u preventd me from winning TT. But ill get them next time
Love the photos especially Miles and Foxy Brown
I can't watch it because you linked it from YouTube Mobile lol.
Follow I will follow back
A girl said she recognized me from the vegetarian club, but I'd never met herbivore.
great post thank you so much <3
#dying [HD] Nightcore - Time Of Dying
“: Lovin watching the bucks on Espn. Bucks v Bulls playoff series would be sweet. #bucks” nice!
S/O 2 for showing me love last night 😘 thanks boo
Indeed. That would work really well with the new HQ building they're working on.
Damn today is beautiful! Suns out, slight breeze, and 70 degrees. This calls for a cold one.
Tweet ya' later!
Late night grind
“The achievements of an organization are the results of the combined effort of each individual.” -Vince Lombardi
I saw that haha but I'm gonna change it now! (:
Tickets to catch rock on April 24th go on sale tomorrow at 10AM, make sure to bookmark this link --> bit.ly/zx2DR2
DailyHookahTip#156: Don't light quick-start #coals on the #hookah, light it on the stove to prevent undesirable tastes from your
No problem, have a good day! RT : Thanks for the RT!
I just wanna give a big thank you to my friend, , for fucking me out of eating Panda Express tonight. Sure Commons will be fine.
I HATE for someone to sneeze on me, in my direction, or sneeze with covering their mouths...
thanks for the mention! have a great weekend!
Greco's tips: 1)Assess organization's financial health and readiness to support scale, 2)establish comfort with growth strategy...
Pittsburgh is fucked up... We gotta get it together.
if they're staying the weekend, we shall stalk
": im fina move to Milwaukee.. fuck it, YOLO!!!!"aint nothing here lol
We will be having a Year End Wine Bottle Sale along with a late night happy hour for New Year's Eve!
don't ignore my business card :-)
SPAM. And it was completely unintentional. Just because I have a dislike for doesn't mean i dislike you. :)
next time I want an adventurous cab ride; I'm calling on you. You can hail a cab in Cali from your #smartphone right?
Thanks for the info! Was hoping it was going to be soon.
i wanna meet austin mahone
Yeah, I agree. Thanks for sharing that!
Thanks for the #ff!
makes me wonder what you got in your car Ocho... Or what that squirrel was trying to bury in your floor mat...???
I personally would like as our official glove of the team local company and quality production
I ❤ and her boo relationship they so THUGED OUT!!
Life is a total of hurt and love in a big circle.
what prize do you win if you get the most favorites for your #defineentrepreneurship post?
It doesn't feel like Sunday. But I can guarantee that tomorrow will feel like a Monday.
If you still ask about my patentS you obviously do not know me.
If you can't handle me at my worst, you sure as hell don't deserve me at my best.
Home waiting for my baby!!! ❤
Want to buy a prison system? a #Lottery? Liquor distribution rights? a #Turnpike? The State of #Ohio is selling! Get em while they're hot!
Best laid plans... Left early for Estacada and just pulled over b/c the under storage compartments won't lock. Never a dull moment!!
and i missed it once again!!ugh
But that's just because of the bad look people give it
Hi Mike I have always looked up to you in many way whether it was when I was boxing or just in general you are my
I'd be willing to donate a box.
Dividing to conquer today! headed to Jax for meeting & staying put to work on #FAS2012 poster.
I'm alive&i will survive show the world that I can take it
I'm not going to wait around forever
HA! Really? #BadPR RT : works for So, PR 101, "Reuters has a story today..." isn't going to hook him.
Blake Griffin is destroying Zach Randolph in the post.
greet me with a middle finger when you see me!! ill be honest mals--kinda #drunk right now
YES!! RT “: Spent the night thinking about Facebook changes. One thing clear: content more important than ever.”
Merry Christmas!
There are some def. moments in Twitter of historical sig. (Iran elections) & then there are the long-term trends.
Director is the pilot of the story in a lighthouse to keep the actors off the rocks.
damn! I thought Robb Vogel was going to get the endorsement. Second pick was you.
you'd be throwing your tomatoes at them. Still hoping for a Community softball game.
Goodyear, ACT At Thunder Road - PaddockTalk
Only Hoes Out At This Time Of The Night
DS: the Ravens season is over.. But with the draft, free agency, Ozzie's magic & training camp, we'll get to 1,000 followers by next season!
awh thank you ;)
What photo??
My cousin has her prom today. I lovee her soo much, and I'm excited for her. <3
What is the term for plunging just-cooked food, such as vegetables, into ice-cold water to halt the cooking?
Beat in bowling :)
#sschat #edteach #edchat How do you deal with colleagues who are unwilling to try new ideas especially in the area of technology?
#StayAwayFromMeIf if u have absolutely nothing positive to say...
young jeezy#leave you alone.
Anywhere! I would have hit that up today for lunch but didn't want to get out of my car.
you guys were awesome! And I got one of your new CDs! I love it!!!
Sizzlin' Summer Sunday Drag Brunch! Erica Andrews & Krystal Summers will make you laugh & smile while u enjoy some great food! ck us out!
tmrw we going ham. So stop whining.
I have so many funny things I want to say about the kid wearing a Lakers jersey and hat. Dude, Kobe won't help you pass this final.
I miss our life talks
Which is preferable in C#: partial classes or extension methods, and why?
More great Ergen nuggets: The DISH chair also said Monday that if AT&T's proposed $39B takeover of T-Mobile goes through, the doors are ope…
Don't know what I'm gonna do tonight. Last episode of Desperate Housewives EVER. 😭 I will literally be crying rivers.
Just out of curiosity, are your parents siblings?
RT : RT For younger kids, Treat “whine” as a foreign language. Since you don’t understand whine, he will stop...
theres never a right time to say goodbye
I like men, not boys.
How is that??
mission accomplished :)
That fictional book is now more powerful than the man they suppose to SERVE
Saw folks shooting #Dexter on pacific in #sanpedro yesterday. #sanpedro is the new
well it's likee messages from other people, so it's not me hahaa. but thanks (:
I really like your pants, off.
theres a 1 in a million chance that will notice me
No one in this whole bar is talking. The set is just that hauntingly beautiful.
...then I tried a cheesecake made with red berry ciroc.. Superb.👌lol
Music on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno - WM
well thank you-everyone loving the new pic!!! Thx
she was like that everyday for us when I was in eighth grade. feel lucky (:
lol that's why
One of favorite tips on writing...Why this day? Answer this questions and you'll fix many-a-plot.
Ah so full!!
Three more... RT : CALL TO ARTIST: ART Milwaukee is commissioning a mural at Miller Brewery.
we're not that bright cut us some slack :/ lol
todd mentioned said cookware. Im jealous.
Great info about that pirate app!
Last day of CAMEX, come see us in #2521!
Great to meet you yesterday at your super informative talk. Safe travels home!
Mother's Day is a Week a away. Give her something that will impact How she looks & feels: A gift certificate or appt. 904-636-0787
cssmania now charges $10 to submit? whack.
you think that will ever happen and whos this cool guy your talkin about?
Tell us about YOUR experiences with Hieber’s – post here, message us, or email . Tell us what you like, or what we can...
I admire your views and your desire to help! Hugs
Free dessert per table on us this week! Just check in to us on your Yelp, Facebook, or Foursquare apps when you visit.
isn't he so adorable? at first he didn't like it-than we stepped outside in the rain and now he's in love with the jacket.
This could be the little devil who is prankish or disruptive in the classroom or with other playmates.
dam dats one kool ass teacher who finally sees all the effort u have done during ur skoolwork...
fear of snakes
Musicians watching #8in8 panel, remember something Damian Kulash said at the beginning: "It's great, except nobody pays you"
you know I'm behind the scenes working on my performance, thank you so much you will b in the vip every time I go, much L H
Thanks Laura!! <3 <3 Hope you are having a great week. X
In art with damn fool.....
absolutely. Btw, Your work looks great up there. Awesome job!
Chili Cookoff in San Diego this saturday!
Does anyone know anything about Inverse #Kinematics? Seeking a Sr. #Developer with IK exp. Hit me up if interested -
no way! Do tell - who? Do you remember? are they still in the competition? AWESOME
Well done, Steph. Very even tempered and non-accusatory while still getting your point across. Well done.
Hah...I will ask you questions, don't worry. Unless you WANT to do a monologue :)
Hi MU Grads! The GSO is looking to organize a series of 'Coffee & Conversation' to chat w/ grads from all over campus. What times work best?
Rivera reveals that before his injury, he was leaning towards returning to pitch in 2013.
Watching Harold&Kumar (: its the new christmas one(:
4th row lucas oil vs steelers sunday night. I will take it al day
I love how I can relate to every song. They're the best <3
Wider sidewalks for people to walk outdoors & breathe the terrible #LA air? How about subsidies for healthier foods & #diets ?
Solar biomass: using trees, bacteria, algae, corn, soy beans, or oilseed to make energy fuels, chemicals, or building materials.
hey I got to go bye
What's your all-time favorite beauty product and why?
Happy overstuff day. Today is the day u can still taste the turkey from yesterday in your burp
Was expecting to come home to some bomb food considering everyone was feasting before I went out.... Nothing 👎
going to be great :)
The Sultan of Buffalo Sneezes #coworker is back from her 2-week vacay. Drat. Just in time for allergy season
also we're going to find a way to blame this on luongo somehow.
the last day of my Tuesday/Thursday classes
well neither can I
can't believe this school year is coming to an end!!! =/...wow it went by SO fast!!!
#6 the first day on the countdown <3
Its complicated!
car payment day sucks
It's actually very interesting. I just couldn't help being a smart-a$$.
Mother Nature wreaked havoc on the roses with these winds - petals all over. Looks like a wedding took place in the backyard.
no, that IS vacuum. I need a carpet broom.
also check out the free vocabsushi iPhone app &learn GRE vocab through classic novels. flashcards out/Jane Austen in!
looks like I found Nemo.
miss you too!
good heavens! Of course I shall… so sorry for the good Mister :(
so very lame
Wow! Hollie Cavanagh opened #americanidol with a terrific rendition of "Rolling in the Deep" by Adele. Well done.
But I'm feeling a lot better--thank you :)
pretty good nap
Where have you checked?
BEST DAY EVER! Clearly Ally has magical powers. See y'all tonight!!
i have JB as A Friend on skype
Sit yo 5 dollar ass down, before I make change ! (;
eat chocolate bunnies and say fuck it like the rest of us bro
#Zipsters, you only need to complete three simple steps for a chance to win a free ride in a BMW.
Hi Please email us at and we'll respond accordingly | Thanks for the interest in
Need to go buy a frame for this photo.
RT : The Dickman Brothers are in Seattle tomorrow night at Benaroya Hall! Matthew Dickman & Michael Dickman Come......
Who is wearing shorts in the workplace today? My hair is frizzing out a bit from this Van Hise humidity.. :/ wa-wa.
What was your biggest surprise moment ever on the show?
K twitter is fuckin up... :/
I Hate My Face
The Daily Aztec is independent from us. But scanning the archives does sound like a good idea!
Could I please have a beta invite code? Thanks!!
Marlies and Carlos say have a good trip as well. We missed you in New York!
id be willing to trade some Christmas ale for #vawine..... (wish id known sooner, there's some in the fridge!)
Goodmorning Austin! Love you(:
So they remade punk'd
Mushrooms always grow in damp places and so they look like umbrellas.
Mizzou is a force to be reckoned with in the NCAA tournament. Anything less than a Final 4 appearance will be a complete failure.
We will be hiking at Kenneth Hahn park in Los Angeles next Saturday July 9th. Join us!! Register at www.nourishedfamilys.com.
This guy is super funny on that kobe interview
Tom Cruise turns 50 this year
my first time doing one on my own. don't hurt yourself...its really rough. lol ;)
Habitat accepts all people no matter race, religion,political affiliation, sexual orientation, or background. We love you all.
Didn't get it wet. Didn't do nuttin to it... Why it acting ?!? Slow, much??? :P
Starting work on a local showing of The Visitor - great coalition working to talk about immigration detention and deportation issues.
I'm not familiar with the show #unnecessaryhashtaggery Also, they should consider shortening it.
ah san diego <3 i truly don't understand how i survived five years away from you. one weekend was too long.
Sunshine and swell times
James Harden got elbowed hard...wow!!!
Woke up in a world where #lakings are 1 win from the Stanley Cup Finals..... Im so going to LA!!
call me
my #WifeWalker also refuses to talk about #GameOfThrones with me.
whiteness creates the false sense of interest whiteness becomes property
I'm still drunk, gotta sober up so I can head to the studio
take no advice from Erica lol.
good question e__e
Man I absolutely CANNOT WAIT for next weekend. The Players is my favorite event on tour.
Sure, you can deal with kids, but can you deal with Skwirls? We hope so!!!!! Best & success!!!!
We are right here and working hard! :)
Thanks for the retweet@
oh ok sweet! Let's chill, it's nice- pretty hot lately!
bring in your wife and kids for some ice cream! :-)
good to know!! With or without chocolate?
This is not a premiere?
Thank You mami : Easy to support the talent you share! Happy Sunday T!
I miss playing in my band so much right now
it's gross, but I feel like it's a different shade of yellow
I use to be in ma twitter bag heavy im so lite now smh
i need to clear my mind.
You're my beautiful girl.
who said anything about a baby?
Don't fall before you're pushed. - Proverb
The #jackdaniels selection is now done as well!! Look for these personal touches at #mgmgrandlv bars and outlets in the coming weeks!!!
I may have given a damn, but I NEVER gave a fuck.
Stop ignoring your pain and let someone help you get to the bottom of it. www.drbradfarra.com
good signing.
I was wondering if yhu CLD follow me todai
and now you want somebody to cure the lonely nights, you wish you had somebody to come and make it right.
! the sheer hypocrisy of it all. and yes, i guess room for boys too, but i feel like shared poison = worse!
lol really at 3:22 in the morning u don't think it can wait until later?
Can't wait for the next party.
damn man I missed out on that session. But I have started 420 already
Thanks, we did! Too bad I couldn't get the kid to eat the Mac 'N Cheese :-)
I really hate when I drop the bottle cap cuz I def dont put that shit back on the bottle
she is choosy or something but the fact that we always want to give her the best makes it
you were blonde?
rejected... at least money takes no part in this for me
Can I wear gold lamé?
i heard you are visiting me! :)?
Are you participating in ? We're excited for Friday's #edemocracy panel.
Anyone know why traffic is being redirected on my block and cars are being searched? Not sure if I should go out to ask questions...
dude. Are you stupid?
Yes a good talk happened last night indeed. I can't confirm the Subway sandwich though. :)
Lupia. Communicating in a partisan environment: like it or not, your science communication is political
it has been quite a while! :)
Watching Steve Jobs special on 60 minutes. He reminds me so much of a boss I once had it's scary!
wish that was here in idaho too!!!!!
no way!!! Are you for real?! :) we like him
Can I get a little goose in my Oj?
the #AHSFX finale was terrible. Made me want to vomit.
I really like bulk product import/export extension for magento... Helped me a lot with custom options and gallery images.
For sure RT : A3: What about Fried Green Tomatos? Or Okra? M....
Its going to be another late open mic. Thanks to all the amazing ppl playing and listening
Carnevor Gift Card + Mother's Day Card = Done Shopping :)
Thanks so much to everyone who attended #Chicago Heroes for #Haiti last night. Great turnout for a great cause.
"bartenders are the new musicians" -
B Shutz: Gold OA allows teachers and concerned citizens to remain inside the scholarly community.
Inaccuracy. RT : What in the world has gotten into Rajon Rondo's jump shot?
#nowfollowing hopefully the guy with the long black hair healed your sinuses...lol.
May is going to be incredibly busy. Wouldn't have it any other way :)
k guyz im out realy tired mabe and will notice me tomorow
why are we calling this number
I can't Drive Slow Cause I feel Like I'm NEVER gonna get to my destination
yeah sounds good! :)
OH on Angelina's dress: She looks like a bloody, dying swan. No, she looks like a tampon.
Planning for 2011 Tax season
that's great!
Nah, criticism and commentary is valid too - especially if it incites other people to make progress. :-)
#drugreactions: Side effects of a #drug can take years to appear. Use medications that have been in the market for several years.
always Yo call me
lol u silly
What's Happnin
Why can't I just meet one really amazing guy?
Feel like a good uncle by taking my nephew to the movies
Its funny cause your a whore and your like twelve.
Ditto! Sign me up to canvass : haven't given to re-elect yet, but will if finally comes out for
#FF for hosting our nearly sold out performance this past Tuesday.
Actually it sounds like your *get up early for work* body clock is working just fine.
Keep up the great work. I enjoy watching you play. lovely family my bro keep playing hard..
Hello I am a student of and am inquiring about internships at in Milwaukee. Are still you accepting?
Are you religious? Because I'm the answer to all your prayers
My resolve to get at least 8 hours of sleep each night is weak. Going to give it another shot tonight. 'Night twitterverse.
That Zumba fitness ain't no joke
the shining will forever remind me of film lit, lol
Writing a novel.
It's too early for movie-making...
We can't tell you just yet. But something tells us if you reread that tweet a few times, you'll pickup on a few clues. ;)
Great turn out at #bashh ! Time to work the crowd.
how appropriate :) !
"Music is the shorthand of emotion." -Leo Tolstoy
Be on the lookout for the latest Prof. Burke commercial which is also co-promoting #TheAvengers!
": “Solitude is a way to defend the spirit against the murderous din of our materialism.”-Thomas Merton"
Wish I could play... RT Starting a summer flag football league tonight
I can't handle this anymore...
Yours is hardly a "fresh" perspective - it's just the same treadworn social conservatism.
I'm going to something called a mushroom dinner tonight. It better be FUN(gus)!
Unfortunately my unicorn powers can't work in these situations. odfjgdfg Why did this have to happen. Ugh. that's so sad D:
We live in the “WTF” generation. [W]ikipedia [T]witter [F]acebook
Q7 Read & save job descriptions for positions you like. Ask yourself how you can get those qualifications via work/study/volunteer
Tonight's Band Night with THE CHEATERS is brought to you by Jagermeister!
Missed you too, Dapper!
it personally...i mean u gotta laugh at life 2 enjoy it.:-) ▔\▁(ヅ )▁/▔
Maybe you're just Hungry?
worst realization
Looking for Youtube's next big star for my show, would love to profile them. Follow and send me their info!
Fantastic speech from POTUS and now time for the GOP rebuttal. Should be interesting...
u guys'll make it, hope u do well, but there are only 3-4 teams that can win it all this year.
Happy to report that I successfully defended my dissertation yesterday. Thanks to many of you for the encouragement & friendship
Well it's time for a nap, than it's off to the taste of colorado. Meeting some friend, going to see the Neville Brothers. Later ;-))!!!
how'd you do?
if this game stays like this syracuse will pull out and win. Cuse wins close games.
32 teams with about 12 players each and only 32 owners is that fair. 50/50 split is that fair?
“: Chase is in town. I can see you parked down the street from my house.” you should check his bedroom;)
I don't need to hope anymore because I'm tired of being disappointed.
"It's all about ass, isn't it?"
Wonder who I'm riding wit tmrw down KennyWood ..
we had a crazy night
Shower time. When I come back the Lakers better be in the lead.
yes (: #middleschoolmemories are the best haha (: so much dramma but never really apart of it this year(:
ok, i will foever officailly never eat another popcicle ever again
I just can't stop listening to My Kinda Party by Jason Aldean!
I never sweat a bish that y I alway keep a towel
4 for me :D
: stop stalking austin mahone. ;D he's a normal kid like you both .... losers ;D
Yes!!! Good things DO happen to good people.
I have used 199.9 mb out 200 mb for this month on data... I'm one lucky dude
Rather die enormous than live dormant, that's how we on it.
Just dance, gonna be okay, down on the floor. Just dance, spin that record, babe, been here before.
All your fortune lies beneath your hat. - John Oldham
On the way to band contest:)
Fuck it im never coming to the movies wit her nd him again
LET'S GO HEAT!!!
Disney's night of Joy. Mercyme, BarlowGirl, Thirday....etc. Sat sept.11-12. What a way to think about 9/11.
Can't wait to see my sister tomorrow!!!
RT : Move in day for class of 2016 is Aug 23rd! #soexcited --> Make sure to follow and !
Np! Thanks for the follow also. :)
#itsawesomewhen my crush looks at me and smiles
Tom was with me at a political function and introduced himself as Todd, todd palin. I'm married to a smart alek.
Busy here already! And people are looking to buy instead of just looking! Great news!
Now, Marie: "My soul paces the afterlife...puff phantom cigarettes...what haunts me is what's left unreconciled."
Yankees activate Eric Chavez; send Eduardo Nunez to Triple-A. (Carig)
thanks and thanks for your interest in the event. Our bishop will be there, I think.
#viennateng and #alexwong were absolutely awesome!
I wish would make me something to eat -.-
My boyfriend needs to cone home sooner!
it to do neat things. Totally new project, so the rules haven't all been written yet. Which is part of why I'm excited. :D
Was at dinner and 2 women were talking next to us. NONSTOP. Sounded like clucking hens after a minute. I think I was happier their food came
ebay is usually ur best bet for older stuff, just make sure the seller has good feedback.
Thank you for the shout out, Alex. We should meet up this week. Interested?
Manhattan..but I'm headed to Jersey now. Will be in the Bronx & Jersey City tomorrow..
Another birthday where I wish you would come up to me, text me, or tell me on facebook to have a happy one, but it never happens.
"Schmaltz, or chicken fat, has a great flavor and richness; it has a deeper flavor than duck fat and can be used on nearly everything."
Have you been wondering about renting out your house for the Super Bowl? What ?s do you have? Send them my way for a Star article I'm doing.
all these ladies are freaking pepas!
The security of "security questions" seems dubious. I always think my answers could be figured out with a little reporting.
It was fun last night! :) RT : Hanging out with at Front Page news in Little 5!
Hey I need to talk to you!
1.You dance amazing 2.Sing amazing! 3.You are amazingly HOT!!!!! Wow #Triple-threat!!!!!! #Inspiration #Rt<3
Those Chincoteague photos are beautiful.
If I hadn't been late to school I could've asked my mom to pick me up early
reasons to whine? perhaps, but there is a constructive way to verbalize feelings that doesn't include whining
Hey , my answer is Joanne
D;
When you start LIVING for GOD...worry, pain, anger ends.... Start living for God and watch how your life changes!
That'll work. :)
12 great fast & furious messages in, I ask about meeting this week & she goes silent for 24 hrs. This is sandpaper on my sanity.
Sorry I'll have to miss the dry run after the #SItweetup. How to catch the next one!
austin has a gf?
Bell bell I am SO happy! lol
Humor distorts nothing, and only false gods are laughed off their earthly pedestals
Ready for this Craig Campbell concert! HH central is about to get started in about 10min. Come party with the best!
are you still in tally ?
Don't let your affection give you an infection, put some protection on that erection
A Simple Homemade Brownie Recipe from Scratch by Simone Smith
I love a man that can eat pussy right!!
that is to say, #atxcouncil ppds UTPDC contract discussion
#Phraseoftheday - We are in FINAL construction documents, so NO more changes! Ever had to say that before? ;)
Butler opens as a 4 point favorite at home today against the Milwaukee Panthers.
We store no credit card information, and any such info must be reentered each time, so no serious harm could befall you anyway.
“: Barack. Romney is ignorant and fake. RT : Mitt Romney vs. Barack Obama” Obama going down!
I'm a NPR junkie too - esp This American Life and Planet Money. I think we'll get along great!
I meant baseball, to actually have space to stretch out and let it fly. I would if I could though.
Literally just spent the past 5 hours on my floor finishing my label project. My back is in knots :(
heard it was rough for the cinematic quadrupeds. Maybe the Broadway version is the only way to go
Or "Desolation Row"
what time does it start? Screening just ended
You are beautiful. Love.
tears, sneezing, wheezing, and itchies. Bloody
Some of my current openings include: Group Manager; Miami Tourism; AE’s for Tech, Corporate and Consumer; VP, Crisis PR; and Senior Executi…
love ya and thank u 4 holding me down tonight!! Sorry I forgot to thank you on stage, but you and were amazing!!
what's good for Friday bro
#FF - Lily, YOU are amazing. I know things are hard right now, but stay strong. You can get through it. I believe in you.
i do!
well watch that shit.. thats crazy.. it's sad
Lots of #awesome thunder and lightning today. Maybe it'll be quiet?
Good and Sweet dreams remember its not a sweet dream if its not sticky lol
Who told you too be nice?
Ok I see that the use of the word "amazing" to describe the Sonos ad had the wrong intention. I'm just really happy with the results!!
Excited for 's birthday in 4 days!
Now it makes sense! Dem & GOP on was Apr Fools gag. Y else would they be so out of touch? Just let it be!
Honestly, I have no idea. Google it maybe :)
Hey , coming to your party tonight (I'll be the "Blob" particle in Mezz. K-117). Break a leg!
"I didn't think—I couldn't tell if it was a banjo or electric guitar or if it was lightning bolts from heaven." - Hartford on Earl Scruugs
Aside from , a few top #edtech news spots =
Tweet stealing & swagger jacking is for losers!!!
- If the BOSS says New Jersey, it's New Jersey
I am talking to a number of nonprofits and child advocates in the area to maximize the impact of this effort. Website will be up by mid Oct.
Great! It will be the start to a spring of looking differently at our outdoors.
Life is a shit sandwich and on bad days you get no bread
I like your style.
I didn't think it was possible to find announcers more annoying than Buck & Aikman or the MNF crew. I was wrong.
That's good Linde.... We all have them days sis
You're welcome! I'm doing great! Thanks for asking. ;)
not unless you are here.
thanks, Pamela! I got it at the Hudson Booksellers store in the Nashville airport. It might be an airport thing.
Failure is your best teacher.
so they not jumpin me ? Well he must be an octopus then cause I saw a lot of shit up in my face
Happy Friday everyone!
friday and saturday
oh grass.
Bahahahahahahahahaha!!!! I hope you're okay.
thanks for the follow, and yes I agree The Flaming Lips "Waitin' For A Superman" is a gem.
Tv Lcd Color Lcd Tv Portable - cheap lcd tvs
believe it honey! You deserved it<3 you
that sounds about right for Intel's logic. Strange acquisition...
hey how do you know about ? great to see we have a follower from SoCal!
you could text me !
tummy aches have been off and on 4 awhile. We've talked 2 allergist, gastroenterologist. Another scope coming in June or July.
Hour number 30, had a Monster and an oatmeal raisin cookie. Is today still Monday or April??
"You can now set end times and durations for your Meetups." <-- That's great, and I love you Meetup, but why is this just happening?
Haha I made salsa and guac. My grandma doesn't like cream cheese :(
Light on my heart, light on my feet. Light in your eyes I can’t even speak. Do you even know how you make me weak?
#MSC2011 Happy to see a large number of sessions as well as examples of schools from across the USA being represented.
thank u :)
Come on Angels!!
If I had a gun... Oh wait, I do have a gun... #southern ;)
#questionsihateanswering "do you still like " well la duh I do!
is that Dorothy Hamill?
Haha! You beat me to a tweet of the NYT story. CRAZY STUFF!!
Romance novelist trivia? I want to play that!
Stay positive! We have the Phillies...
Girl, just keep working... lol
This guy keeps yelling "2012!!" In class. Like shut the fuck up. Seriously dude.
when i'm dying i have a feeling i'll be all "i wish i could tweet this right now"
I hope there is somewhere that serves it. When I live there, I know I'm going to miss Bojangles really badly!!
1st game at the Diamond this season, guess we're not good luck to the home team as it was a tough game and temp was chilly
Something about that was stated in a WISN article that wasn't in the JS article.
Virtual tours for Real Estate help #Realtors move properties, but the #MLS will not allow hosting on
The best is when he's the raccoon! "I've had, like, ten babies by now."
let me know
Have an amazing Monday! God created Mondays do you'll appreciate Friday! Use it as a fresh start! Blessings! P.G.
No HH tonight? I'd do that too.
KNIGHTHAWKS GOAL! Point grabs the rebound and is left with a wide open net after a shot from Accursi.
Headed out to sell a DISH Network Tailgater, the magical dish-in-a-bubble that points itself! By way of McDonald's. :)
Should Taste Like Water
Miami USA
No, of course not!
fallow back :)
Thanks for the response. Will do.
I've been reading about the emerging trend of wearing head scarves (very '50s). Have you tried it? Good for bad hair days!
my only regret is there were only 7 episodes in season 1 and we flew through them. That show is so god!
there is a wocket in my pocket
Thinking of my next move.......
“: Excited to release our first single on iTunes this week! Keep watching for more updates.” can't wait!!!
Enjoying the new Wild Flag CD. It's as though Sleater-Kinney never died...
Watched #In Time. Ok movie with an AMAZING premise. It was trying to be Gattaca (by the same director/writer) but didn't quite pull it off.
nothing to do but whatever~follow me and i'll follow back~NOT lying
my my that is a sweet setup.
sigh, wow, that commentator completely missed the point. Just wow. So much that could be said, but where do you start
Hungover as Fuck. But a Damn good night!
Is that the Rutger Hauer flick? RT : Watching Hobo With A Shotgun
Yup! We run the buckeye corner haha.. Come visit sometime! Although Im quitting this week lol
#FOLLOWMEAUSTINMAHONE I wish I could go to your concert!! But I'm gonna watch it online <3 <3
when you play a successful prank on someone
Hiring Engagement Specialists to provide exceptional customer service. Apply online or in person. www.callcarenet.com/careers-details.asp
Now following .....I suggest that you do the same shit! Legendary life saver....The Locker Room coming soon!
You can't wait for life to hand you things. It doesn't work like that. Anything worth having is worth fighting for.
do count as breaking out? They've been around for awhile.
Apparently Gregory the llama is hanging out on the HUB lawn right now, thanks to Stillepoint Llama Sanctuary and CHID 480.
come to our next wine tasting and we'll tell you all you want to know (and more probably! :P)
I'm in the Mother frigging Phx, Az baby!!! Can I get an AMEN!!
Fantasy Baseball Rankings 2012: Early Risers Who Can&#39;t Be Trusted Moving Forward
Long day of work but it's all good #makingmoney #andpizza #$$$
Happy #NationalTeacherDay thank you to all those who work daily to improve the lives of others, tweet us your favorite teacher memory
How does it feel to know that you've seen me naked? (was a corpse in the morgue early on in season 5)
I love #Wednesdays!
is a solid follow.
listening to jason aldean
SEI Sounds of Soul Choir on the main stage...
You can't name a video game that wouldn't be better if Rockstar made it.
Hope you're having an active morning!
Definitely going to be awesome.! RT : Excited for #SXbehavior design with
honey, your not popular, your vagina is.
I'm oddly jealous
I like how no one ever tweets me..... :(
Indie Excellence Awards Accepting Submissions! Books with publication dates of 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 are eligible.
I like your new avatar! :)
Got get ready 4 work in the monring
Just getting off and I check my phone and I see.the HEAT lost WTF.lol
Take a break from basketball. Come to Outpost. It's freaking beautiful outside!
Ivy Champ Men&#39;s Swim/Dive Team Names Award Winners, 2012-13 Captains
Here I come gym. Training commence. ますぐじぶのことばぜってまげね。。。おれのにんどだ！！！
Psalm 46:10 Be still and know that I am God.
but what about the slow weeks in the year??? Some SMALLER shops can be crippled by TOO MUCH OVERHEAD IN ART DEPARTMENT.....
Do you get a lot of snow in Georgia? :)
If your in the #Seattle metro area, go see our friends play with tonight at Overlake Church. You won't regret it!
It's a taping week. Crazy
In coast guard city u.s.a. I see my dads boat but not him. Wish you were here. Come home soon!
I wish Thanksgiving was today.
see I knew you'd make me smile :) lol
Jordan would of took control of the game and finished with a W..
Penalty to Leicester - odds on Flood will get this one
Went outside to my car and regret it because it was so PERFECT and now I'm stuck in this hell hole :(
Wow people love Perfume Seven! 2000 followers mark reached, stay tuned for more great deals!
congrats - I hope your well
Appreciate all the retweets!
I cant wait for the beach.
currently writing one on Detroit. Great speech.
Michelle Obama congratulates the 10 women honoree's for working to end oppression and use their voices to fight inequality and suffering.
Completion by Design college leaders realizing its not enough to focus on #deved - even "college ready" students drop out at alarming rates
Having a fascinating conversation about ham with
what school did you decide on lil cuz?
right?!? Annoying
Way to go John. You are the voice of reason on Obama pretending to care for latinos.
#Vertigo is so surreal. #Hitchcock out does Buñuel at significant surrealism. Especially in his ironies.
Alas. It's been a struggle rooting out the film images from my brain as I read, but I've enjoyed it so far.
After a long day a beer life is good
The way #MittRomney avoids the reporter asking him a pointed question on the plane makes my stomach turn.
Twitter nd Facebook off!! im bout to watch a movie on Netflix till i fall asleep...lol ") that's my friday! =/ lol
" Your my little secret " (;
If College Football doesn't have a playoff by next year, the NFL should create a Real Minor League System for kids 18-20
Also having a drawing I went back to drawing and I was really good was very bizarre
they arent catching teams off guard when they do steal and their jumps must be terrible to get caught at this rate
Indeed. And so many industries out there waiting to be similarly reinvented. Consider #Law for starters.
Thank YOU! Your team is incredible. RT SLELLC: Thank you to MTVIggy for bringing us on to work with them on an amazing show.
I think so, but then again, I'm not the one writing the piece. :-)
didn't mean by me fuck that....I'd pay someone to do mine lol
cant wait till u get here. and its so cold here today wtf.
. All sluts must die, and everyone shocked jury didn't know that.
Maybe if I were better looking I'd have friends that would want to talk to me.
I get it. You follow me so I follow you back, than a week later you unfollow me, so I'm still following you and you're not following me! :S
Just got off the phone with a few partners I have made my decision
cause she believes in ghosts or whatever so they made up a story then the "woman" came back lmfao it looked real though .__.
You playing any games out at Goshen?
bitches are always gonna assume some shit ...
wait, you mean they don't any more? Cool beans! Thanks for letting me know! ;)
Hanging out with , watching play the drums. Life is pretty sweet.
#Oomf Bee On Point W. Her Tweets
I'm excited for dress up day at work tomorrow :-)
I'm drunk. Thank God I'm surrounded by cornfields.
I realize I haven't seen your newsletter lately? Did I drop off the list somehow or are you on hiatus?
Visualization Strategy that can be used in public speaking - “Fourth, Remember happy moments from your past.”
went 2dem meeting last night& they asked who I was with;was a little embarrassed alone;mentioned u &that went over well lol
Uugh... I enjoy writing papers but the last 5 days have pretty intense with a death in the family... talk about taking time away from it all
lucky you :) I haven't eaten dinner yet hahaha lol :) glad to have both my siblings back woot woo!!!
Being Pagan is so cool
Just starting my mock congress speech. Yes, it is indeed due tomorrow...
ISN'T IT BREATH TAKING?!?!
You tell em honey!
Thanks Happy Sunday!
ugh it's so sad :(!!! I'm so attached to all of them lmao
Im just nigga rich..!
I didn't want you to think I didn't want to talk to you anymore, haha. I love you more! <3
well let me know. If its during your freshman year of college ill have my own apt but next year I'm in a bigger room with a
Thank you for the follow!
Thanks Bonnie! She's worked incredibly hard and is looking forward to the opening as well.
the sox are gonna have one hell of an outfield when crawford and ellsbury come back
Maybe we are...
fish is better dear :)
unfortunately the NCAA would not allow me to work while in school. However IMO that should be changed.
We joined Instagram! Find us on instagram by searching for !
i lost my sign when I moved...not happy about that
I ate a lot yesterday.
Memory lane
Tonight I will be speaking USGBC meeting at UM. I will be displaying a few paintings and will talk about upcycling. Join us at 5:30!
Anne romney is using Teleprompter
thanks Hannah! :)
It's from earlier 2day, She was so nice & down to earth, I love her:)
If anyone had a bad day today, remember that today in 1976, #Apple co-founder Ronald Wayne sold his 10% stake for $800..
Wear green & SAVE GREEN on St. Patricks day with Comfort Inn & Suites Vancouver. Book online @ www.vancouverwahotel.com or call 360-696-0411
Anybody have a good lead on a mattress? Want to surprise someone who doesn't have one
From the tweets, it appears everyone had a great time at the Rookie Bootcamp last night. I had a MASSIVE group--thx for coming out!
not soon enough lol ;)
Thanks love! And I'm SERIOUS about Barolo!! Tuesday next week?!?!
This school is dirty and smells like shit reason#165218522333 i want to leave this school.
Evocative images of a film set - San Francisco Examiner
Well thats a good thing. you'll be 60 and you'll look like a 16 year old 
Busted from WDOP Deep Stack .. allin preflop with 88 v 55 ... He flops a set ... out in 8th place ...
I knew I should of sticked too the plan & never let his ass back inn . MAAaaannnn
I know. I also didn't make it to san Diego to see and
"I'm being haive!" -- 2 year old son, when his mother told him told to behave
"You may be delayed but not denied!" -
Gotta love 106&Park for paying respect to M-Bone. R.I.P.
haha no problem(: follow me lolol
Ack wish someone would sneak a good default while everyone is arguing.
So honored for the follow!
“: Note to self! Always think before you tweet! I forgot my softball girls follow me! #coachingfail” Bahahahaha!
Omgosh this kid is so complicated.. Lol u know
Did you see talking about our fashion show on this morning? Just over a week to go!
Power? I'd be happy if back to back batters could put the ball in play, especially when the bases are loaded.
Guess it's a good thing doesn't work TechCrunch anymore then? ;)
I can feel the birthday aloha all the way in the mainland. Give my love to your precious family. Keep doing amazing things!
Sounds fun. I'm in if you want to go with me.
thanks for the movie recommends!
Playing S today on the A-Z. come by and check it out. tell your friends to do the same. #supportlocalmusic Gashouse Radio
Obama is the BIGGEST dumbass to me.
it's great just been on grind weather is great
i retweeted it
HAHAH yup about you
Wow, sexy twicon, just stopped by to say it's a sin if no one's eating that ass... If I'm not being too subtle.
they're much more than just looks to me :)
Good job drummers - that was a fun party. See ya next year, Debbie!!
#10ThingsIHate: mean people, chocolate, female condoms, church, squash, idiots, brainfreeze, queefs, celibacy and birds.
you can prevent it tho
Everyday im getting sick even worse:(
RT : Plenty of MARC delays again tonight
// Are there any NFL stadiums that provide wifi for fans at games? Seems like a lot of benefits to the idea.
is there a way to specify the resolution for the QR code?
RT if you're happy for Austin because he's living his dream <3
Looks like I've missed a lot being away from twitter and today!
Steak for mother's day dinner :) yum
Tks for #FF - Have a great weekend everybody!
Sorry I missed the gregory green talk. His work is great.
#thingsmostpeoplelikebutidont Women with raspy voices.
#10 The Crazy Lobster, RiverWalk(ish) - New Orleans, FL
The gods help them that help themselves.
I am so forever alone.
"Is that your sister?" "Um no that's my mom??" hahaha subway you gotta love it
one dollar shipping.. what more do you want
Stunning picture! Have a great journey along the Road to Hana!
Cuz if that was Bob Knight oooooweeee that would of been something to see!! Lol
ok, because I remember "BJ Armstrong" being thrown around when the good Reverend Doctor Deacon Bishop Gibson was drafted.
Ur love pours down on me surrounds me like a waterfall<3
#FREE SHIPPING. Use Coupon Code: MOUSESHIPS4FREE Tis' the season to be grateful!
Watching Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. documentary. Thank God for documentary filmmakers.
GO FOLLOW NOW!!!!! JUSTIN IS FOLLOWING EVERYBODY WHO FOLLOW SHE NOW!!! BE QUICKLY :O:O
Im sitting here thinking bout some serious stuff, and I think I might re-think my #gameplan for what Im doing. #Patience is key right now.
Yup , I guess.
Fill in the blank: It's Friday, and I feel ________________! (It's time to celebrate the end of the week, don't you think?)
I have a huge following Dr Goddess. I will help you get the names you need to sign the names on this petition. I like ur cause.
did you expect anything else lol ": They don't get my name goes with my URL address. LMAO! They are not bright whatsoever."
Keep it 100 for the kingdom...
RIP Whitney Houston
Charles Johnson here: Just remember, you have the RIGHT to remain silent... USE IT!!!
COME TO LA.
Yep, closing tonight.
I guess I just don't see not feeling up to handling oppressions as a sound reason to support media that keeps them going strong.
hey there! thanks for the s/o and the music! luv it
Thank you thank you thank you! :)
jealous u live near there! ive definitely added the dali 2 my museum bucket list. glad u enjoyed the app too!
again, are you serious!!!??? You didnt know what happened and you think Paterno should stay in as coach?
You realize that is a fake account, right? I'm betting his "donation to the troops" will be just as fake.
Indie films always get me :)
We all agree, however, free up oil resources, then bust it on renewable energy sources! we need a plan that works!!!
Today will be a good day & tonight will be even better 👌
So far the episode is hilarious!!
An unfulfilled vocation drains the color from a man's entire existence.-- Honor de Balzac
One step closer to adopting my son today. Send us your good vibes please!
Is doing a reading for a show!! #futureactress hm??? Lol ;)
Major League Date with my girl. Love ya babe!
Believing passionately in the palpably not true...is the chief occupation of mankind. HL Mencken
Waiting for the bus. Good bye New York take care of my baby boy.
Hm interesting. That's some opaque data. Maybe b/c boomer academics writing about 2nd wave have come into their own?
Yes I had a show today and then shopping with my mom:) How is yours?
I think #sdcouncil needs social media policy. Who's to say there isn't lobbying being done during a public meeting via DM, etc?
totally agree!
Back to Baton Rouge... The hazy, fetid ambience of the swamps awaits.
Storytime w/ rhythm sticks went ok: This is the way we; The sticks on the bus; She'll be tappin'round the mtn; & freeform w/ Kodo drummers.
That was soo funny. I couldn't stop laughing on my way to work regarding d egg pic wanted to date w/ you. That's why we love you
We've been enjoying featuring the choir today. Beautiful, beautiful voices!
I am starving over here, who wanna get me sumtin to eat. naw im messin
Anyone care to confirm or deny the rumor I just started...OOPS, I mean heard?
Why do we have 9 toothbrushes in the toothbrush holder?! Who is worthy of having a toothbrush at our place?! That's some serious business.
Welcome & thanks to all my new followers! Have a fabulous weekend!
Starting to make some headway on my test drupal website. Going to work for 13 hours now. See you later twitter!
if barfield would have had success - we'd still have helmet stickers today.
lol looks like yo poncho badge won't be earned today
Why is my mustache taking forever to grow back? Why is my body healing so slowly. Something is wrong here
Starving. But all I can eat is disgusting oat meal and ice cream.
I'm Supposed to go Friday night for my sister but idk if I can go cause of lax
Other bitches just front
I may have sent Birg an e-mail describing the difference between nonviolence and compliance. He seems confused.
I can't wait til I'm able to be living somewhere else than here. Soon.
We will be at the River of Lights 12/4 for a holiday special
Britney Spears song "Gimmie More" song sounds like she's saying "Demi Moore"...lol
Learn more about wine or just connect other wine lovers -
just what I needed tonight. Thank you!
Tick....Tick.....Tick..... Is it the weekend for you yet?
A 5 minute video can have a turn around time of only 3weeks if working with a vendor.
Toothbrush Express offers great prices on Butler GUM Interdental & Proximal and most oral care products.
RT : Greetings from #Tuscaloosa AL. Twin Anchors rocks!!!
awesome possum!
nigggga where have you been??
we better hang while I'm in NY!!!
I love Where the Wild Things Are R.I.P Maurice Sendak amazing artist.
who is it?
Thanks for following! Happy new year to you!
Depends on how much you like suits and vintage drink-making?
Championship games call for CHAMPIONS. Champions don't whine about a little shoulder pain. They take a Tylenol and suck it up.
Even with a shotgun... 115lb ginger kid barefoot in pajama pants is not mch of a cinematic threat...
BECAUSE YOU STARTED IT.
I feel sorry for kids cursing their parents out and treating them like shit. One day they'll realize what family means
U r busy, no worries! RT : I'll try to play at lunch heheh...
BUT we still encourage you all to go to both of those shows. I will be at the one in Atlanta chillin so I'd love for you to come say hi - W
i was at our school's play
Apparently its frowned upon to "make it rain" while contributing to the collection plate at this Catholic Church. Like my money ain't green.
Thanks everyone for the bday wishes I Love U Guys!!!!
i'm going to keep asking but i think i know the reply...When can i get your podcasts in itunes?????
Oh, by the way. If you comment on your ex's picture, I better never get bitched at again, For ANYthing.
Think I want to go to the nail shop today :)
wow. #Adele's voice. breathtaking.
I did sprint tris on my recovery weeks during marathon training, I thought it worked well! Kept it fun too.
& i consider you my friend. ha. you don't even treat me like one.
uh hello?
already gave them away.
were are u at?
nice. Species?
Happy birthday! x
It's our pleasure...nice to hear from you.
I'll be there soon guys.
Today is CJ Day in Oakland. I'll be live tweeting my pitches. Assuming doesn't shiv me during warmup.
Oh hi, new follower
Has anyone tried the new cornbread in Doral? Tell us what you think!
Just getting into #TaiChi does anyone have experience with it?
This is true. Also, Nathan is being facetious in saying my doppelgänger is out for blood.
Lilja called for interference. #isles to PP
I am at a soccer practice but it's not me who is practicing. Hence the tweets.
pahaha devvo will never get old i love you so much aha
Your the nicest , most perfect person I've ever met . ♥ I wanna be like you ! , and I don't say that alot .
RT : ADMIRALS WIN!!! 5-3 win over Houston give the Ads a 2-1 series lead. This is one of the stranger games we have seen...
Going to Shunty McShunt's to check out live footage from TLDS's Double Door show! Ooohhhhh
we're cutting it tomorrow night after dinner. I did some scheming though, dont be surprised if your missing filling on the right!
Thank you for everyone who came and supported our production of Zanna, Don't! Our next play is Vinegar Tom and it runs from April 20th-29th!
I know!! I was thinking that this morning! She brought us together!! :) Thanks, #CaseyAnthony!
omg I have to tell you about my night shit was amazing lmaoo
Twitter in 1853 was crazy man. we fake slave whipped so many public figures back then
Choosing To Be Single Isn't Selfish, It's Just Smarter To Be Alone Than With The WRONG Person...
now im dying to know what u have in mind hahhaaha- im like a lil kid in a candy store...
help Spidey get followers?
It's funny how people are criticizing spo for "bad coaching" today and give him no credit when he wins.. Some #HEAT fans r a joke!
#SHOUTOUT NO MORE LAWYERS IN CONGRESS
Down in Miami FL taking in some sun
Love being so busy at work! Planning meetings in Manhattan Beach, Dallas, Charlotte. Going to Memphis and Florida next month.
I cant get over that that actually happened. Im proud of myself for not hyperventilating like I did almost 4yrs ago! haha!
I'm looking forward to it. Excited to meet new people and tackle new things. Thank you!
wht up fake
prayers for those affected by the tragedy at the Indiana State Fair last night.
lol yeah I do , I actually like it . And yeah connie told me .. You like it there ?
If your going out tonight stop by after. We open at 12 tonight. Make sure you say hi.
Later today the House will vote on the Senate-amended
Perhaps breakfast on the patio wasn't such a splendid idea in Edo this morning.
No uniform US #cybersecurity standards; though probably obligation for any business to have reasonable #IT security policies.
Appraisals not Assessments Should Determine Losses in Mortgage Fraud Cases
Have some respect for the people around you and smoke outside.
Well , I missed my early morning workout cause I had a conference call with my pillow... 3pm it is
Realizing tomorrows Monday<<<<
Gorgeous photos!
yay!!!! its okay creepers are good as long as thier not eggs
Thanks for promoting Scrubly! I appreciate it. - Bob
Lets go heat!
Seem likee All i Ever do now is Work ! -_-
I clicked on it and is says wiki not found : (
It's too bad Narveson is done for the year. I hope the crew calls up Peralta! Estrada is over-rated
At work checking out all these cool logs about Portland!! -C
I'm getting a sore throat.. In May?
Aromatherapy from watering my Oakland garden: pineapple sage, roses, Meyer lemon, oranges, and more I don't have names for. Ah time & space.
gucci bags: The luxury of difference is its advanced technology ...
i give up seriously
Lol I'm probably the only person on earth that likes aging. I like the feeling of getting wiser and more mature :)
A great friend is someone who makes your problems their problems,just so you dont have to go threw them alone..<3
thats your only defense sir?
so, about 3 songs in so far!
If you'd told me 20 years ago sexy robots would vie for my attention, I'd have said "Kudos Tomorrow!" FB, why did you poop on the future?
Good how about u
We're off to comic con to shoot our promo video!
happy birthday buddy :)
Just got a medium Punch In The Face from It's really nice.
“: "Trusting our intuition often saves us from disaster." - Anne Wilson Schaef”. So true......
What does #ValentinesDay mean to me? Stomach flu in Paris. Très romantique.
Dont ever use someone's past against dem....
you should hear from shortly, but if not, let me know.
Baylor TCU game! A classic college football game at its finest.
good idea :) don't forget to bring all your friends!!
"that is not us"
This girl just keeps talking. I stopped listening at "hello."
"my names copper. I'm a hound dog!" <3 fox and the hound with sis😍😊
thnks. I thougt my neck was going to break lol
The real voyage of discovery consists not in seeking new lands but seeing with new eyes.
thank you for providing me with my first Wesley Stokes memory in years. Was ahead of the trend as far as Pacific Islander-style hair
RT : & are setting up shop for #LastThursday on Alberta/22nd. Support your local artists tonight..
I guess I should reconsider my love for bikram.
Bummed out. Lost a member of my family today. I love you, Beagle, and am happy you're not in pain anymore and are relaxing in doggie heaven.
Knowin' nothing in life but to be legit.
I have never lived in a city where bus drivers have to use the bathroom this much.
Good morning beautiful ladies, you better say it back if you know you beautiful.
After 2 hours of no help from & I have to work. I work in a cat hospital with sick cats. 2 hours was just wasted.
So who do you have in your top 4 of #TheVoice?
I get so bored when I get home from work
how do I still have a hangover
Yes, it was good to meet your colleague John during his recent visit to the archives. I hope things with you are good lately.
I think I have the opening shot for the trailer! :-)
I just want to go to sleep.
iPhone 4gs tweeting
My heart is racing like I'm on a first date! But alas, we've met 8 times before dear !!!! Let us rendezvous all night long!
#BestWaysToGetRidOfAGirl - let her see you reading the Twitter stream of #BestWaysToGetRidOfAGirl. Dumb.
are you at the Apollo?
I miss the way things used to be 😢
I hate how..... after an argument I think about more clever shit I could of said.
Night Louis!
a little bit sooner than ASAP.
shut up
thanks bro!
Sundays are for dancing!
I'm tired
Today @ 5 PM on "Question Reality" on LA Talk Radio, our guest is R&B singer, Une', Go to: latalkradio.com, CHANNEL 1
OMG! Have you read these texts from , this is way too funny.
thank you!!
Mr. RANDY WATSON ladies and gentlemen.
Ah thanks! RT “: Well, was amazing AGAIN tonight at #IronFork. Best table. #brisket #beardsquared”
Gave us all a laugh. RT : Mark is a dear friend and a good sport :)
I'm hoping there is a little burka on burka action
Ever really need to sleep but God is stirring so sleep won't come. Yes it is going to be one of those night.
Thanks for the follow, please let me know if I can do anything for you #VO #voice over
Sorry, I'll wait for the post-lunch food coma next time. Or maybe quote the Necronomicon
LP Thursday! Bring in your records or listen to ours-we just picked up new ones. Happy Hour 4-7pm with plenty of wine to taste or drink.
great! Let me take a look and I will get right back to you! Thanks!
then I see no point to go look at a bridge
Got to class late, wrecked that final, and walked out in under 15 minutes. Wassup lol
#VIP #Follow #TEAMFOLLOWBACK Thank you Mike for your kind and sweet words and shoutout. Have a lovely Week! : ) XOXOXO
tell me what happens if you two start talking ;D haha
Thanks Ty *head rub* lol RT : that packer hat cold
L.A.B.I.S.C Live Alone Before I Stand Corrected
I can't stay awake! O_O i-need-to-do-my-HOMEWORK.
Thank you to all of my new followers! I look forward to Tweeting with you!
Why does the theme from "The Kennedys" quote the theme from "Halloween"? Is it supposed to set the mood?
“Then from far away across the world he smelled good things to eat, so he gave up being king of the wild things.” RIP
HA! Classic seeing the old clip of the AMA's.
Packers SUNDAY Special:$1 off drafts & dumplings if Packers are ahead at half-time. 1/2 off drafts & dumplings if the Packers win!
Looking forward to hearing Furman's George Leventis discuss agile programming techniques.
RT : Possum just walked right into my house through the open back door. Getting ballsier by the day, they are...(#HIWI)
We have heard worker intimidation from for supporting the living wage campaign. Employers do whatever to prevent unions.
#WTH angela: we won't satisfy everyone but we need to take into consideration all the variables and focus on our ultimate goal
Thanks! Been to long -- especially since we are in your 'hood now ;)
keep em coming
Girls from the city go to the country an settle down
Rick Perry's ad "Strong" has 181,606 more dislikes on Youtube than Rebecca Black's Friday video, making it the most hated video on Youtube.
I was an avid player of the game paperboy for NES
what a pair. A spitting llama and an evil leaf hoarding giraffe!
hey have a good wknd?
I agree. Sounds SO #yummy right now!
RT : A #Taurus is stylish, well-groomed, and socially involved.
Merry Christmas, Seattle!
She's straight I'm convinced!!! She's dating a dude named Terrance! Lmao
nah it's not too much and I'll know it all.
PRODUCERS! Send Me Some Beats To My Email.... @
but you don't follow me :'(
Thanks, Cher! The box is due to come this week instead. My mother and I will enjoy it immensely! How was #smx?
. It's time to build a coalition around advancing civil rights, not to bitch.
An older guy caught the ball. They wanted him to throw it back. He gave it to the kid. He just kept crying.
On the flip side, I can't stand the Jim Rome Show. Interviews are fine otherwise nails on the chalkboard w/ the "clone" stuff.
anytime. You can come by both offices.
Currently all of the trash in Center Grove has just begun the journey of their pregnancies. YAYAYYA keeping it classy in the 317
back on baby!! haha
fun. in a super bowl commercial!
"single swag" ok. Good boyz 
Thanks for screening our film!
Congrats to all the graduates tonight ! Your speeches and hard work is very inspiring !
#IfItWasntForTwitter I wouldn't be able to stalk people lol
I think I wants me a girl now.. Somebody to call Mrs.Wilcox
well im about to log off now talk to you allb tommrrow
Cant wait to go get all that cool stuff I found at the closing gymnastics school in Greeley. Tight wire and mini tramp! YAY!
Good evening all - isn't it nice to be home from work?
dude, time for an inaugural tweet!
aww well happy holidays atleast you working
We're so excited for the launch of our new website on Monday. Be sure to check it out next week!
love you too
One down, four to go.
trying to figure out which movie. Gotta be Lion King, right?
Enes with the block! Foul called... bad call. #GoJazz (i guess)
Alright everyone, the Twitter account has 1,666 followers. That number is making me a little nervous. Let's fix that!
javel mcgee look like ice t's son lol
Thankful it's Thursday? Share a story of a nurse you're thankful for
RT : If we do not succeed, then we run the risk of failure.
Everyone is beautiful in their own way, dont put yourself down just becuz of the girls in jersey.
yup - ideally. It would be nice to visit the archives of that place, the Ideal World! Where time is abundant & the coffee is free!
I do enjoy when I have a message from someone that makes me smile. :)
Not exactly what I had in mind... I was thinking more like work, websites, hobby, etc... Not the ugliest chick ever.
glad to hear it! Hope you get a win. We are 0-3.
Well first weekend happens to be a five day weekend that begins now. Cant complain
Holy smoke!
If only the lock button on my iPod was functional, to not only lock but for screebshots, the world would be a magical place with amazingness
loves reading the physical paper even though he's an online person. #mamsummit Me, too!
New Jersey Nets at Milwaukee Bucks tip-off at 8:30 PM ET #nets #bucks #nba (Follow )
400K FOLLOWERS! OMFG! THANK YOU GUISE<3. YOU'RE AMAZING! #MAHOMIES. c:
“: Do you let your friends know how many guns you own? #LoadedQuestions”no
“The best doctor in the world is a veterinarian. He can't ask his patients what is the matter -- he's got to just know.” ~ Will Rogers
My New Years Resolution: finally follow instead of laughing at his tweets via my girlfriend showing them to me. DONE. Ready for 2013.
Please explain lol!
Oh my nose too!! I fuckin hate it when I can't breath through it!! And I can't skip school tomorrow bc of an important test!:(
loves you!
Just checked my followers & see I have new tweet watchers,don't worry I'll keep you entertained,mite even hurt your feelings
check out my new pod cast episode afro deep www.alkkemikelmuzik.podomatic.com
I honestly don't get some relationships nowadays.. I think I'll stick with my band guys. <3
Had a great day working with the lady's in they are awesome, can't wait to finish these songs and show the world 
thanks for the support!
Thats why he's making the big money.....
She Is So Complicated. Lol
Heading to a Game 7. Let's Go
I was stuck by myself in serious traffic on the 10 Freeway, with the cars in the carpool lane just flying along. I jump in the carpool an...
Reminder, we're always closed on Mondays, but we'll also be closed on Tuesday the 21st for Mardi Gras. Have a happy & safe holiday weekend!
Amen RT : Every single artist has flaws, but also many qualities. When we hate, we're only seeing the flaws & ignoring the qual
I want some new cowboy boots! My are all worn out!! But that's what you get when you practically spend your life in a barn(:
#BieberGraduationGifts you should ask some fans to make a scrapbook about his past life through to where he is now!(:
My neice Cassandra was just born. My brother told me first and he was crying. 8pounds 14ounces Finally my little chunker is here:'3
Anyplace where I could buy shares of a new mobile app in exchange for part of the profits?
what are you guys wearing for your birthday dinner?
Dear nausea you are free to leave me anytime now ...
RT : It says a lot when the classiest family photo you have was in Playboy.
that's fair -- i'd still say it's a vast majority. 85% sounded vast majorityish.
uh oh armor readie is on twitter. BIM!!!!!
The issue with Adam then had to so with what he was doing onstage, which as things have it was and is MILD compared to
Wheaton and Doctor RT 24 days till Fall Camp kicks off-- ? Of the day--who do u expect to have huge breakout year?
Happy Halloween
should really follow his Glasses. (;
don't talk to me when your bored im not here to entertain you and don't come to me only when you need a favor I don't like to be used
No Notch has said that after 1.9 is 1.10, although I get what you're saying
#SaySomethin i luv u cant wait
Time to receive a deep tissue massage!!!
hey! I'm okay, thanks. :-) got on hour left of this stinky diner. I think I'm getting sick so I'm gonna od on vit c at home
We are back on twitter!
Check out new online movement to inspire every person in the US to commit $1 to fight extreme poverty
At the end they say, "That is the sound of YOU ROCKING!"
Insert clever tweet here
Happy #Monday! Good luck to all the students out there taking #finals! Celebrate when you are done with #bartab $1
your right.
#NewiCarlyWithOneDirectionTONIGHT can't wait I'm going to watch it!
And I know your daddy, he don't dig me, but he never did understand...#springsteenlyrics Friday
why thank you!!
Watching the tigers rip apart the red sox 7-0 bottom of fifth, must be time for #beerandchicken?
I don't have the laptop sorry
Everyone needs to quit bitchin about how bad life is....everyone is struggling and everyone is stressed, life sucks get over it....live it!
Yay! : Lets go together V! RT : I need to check out your Pilates Plus Pacific Beach Studio ASAP!
is it me or did he seem like he was in a bad mood today?
There's no such thing as an easy relationship
Health tips: hyaluronic acid is the new fountain of youth, it's actually why your finger tips don't scar when cut.
I'm showing off my new tattoo. Haha.
Thank you, my WL form is filled out and ready to go! Just thinking about how to make a great statement :)
Nah...did two years there in undergrad then transferred to NYU. Had some decent troublemaking there though.
i hate the fact that when i start rapping to you on ichat you sign off on me.... -____-
I just got heckeled in my local mall for being a Pens fan! Love it! Lets Go Pens!
Interesting conversation today. Do U even know when you're stressed? More info, read my blog: www.eating4achieving.com
Don't you have some electrical tape in your car?
sounds good. The more I must write the more it flows. Like 2 see your piece. Thx again!
For the 8:30 PM show at Comic Strip Live NYC, coming to the stage: Brian Scott McFadden
maybe we can fetch a chicken for you to put into that ramen lol.
#thatawkwardmoment when youre eating goldfish& studying in the bsb when a mexi reunion forms a circle around you & starts talking in spanish
looking for some beats boss?
RT : In Dublin for keynote at #CNGL #localization innovation showcase. Honored to share stage w/ thought/practice leaders
I'm blessed good brother. I heard you were in a wreck. Couldn't find you on here because you changed your handle on me. Lol.
cook that liquid off. Is it going in a tortilla?
FYI, this not the BIGGEST comeback in NBA history. It's Game 1 of the 1st round. Sat down Craig Sager.
no problem ;)
I'm sure we could find the perfect definition on Wikipedia ;)
Just not sold on JG as head coach, hope he proves me wrong.
We have 2 GHUSA b'days approaching (TMcF & Deb) - let's plan a reunion!
wow i havent tweeted 4 the day
Music Flow !
Beautiful in LA!
everyone go follow . he only needs 8 more followers until 300. i wont stop tweeting until he gets there. 6
#youknowwhatsannoying is when you act like a complete idiotic fool -.-"
MAP testing starts today! NO
I have a son n law?
Some people are offered a life and they go and take it, but if it ain't about dreaming about then don't chase it.
I remember the towers being built in early 70's, you could see them from everywhere, hope we never forget!!
i think i lost my laptop...
well at least now you don't have to tip him
What's up Carl!
thank you for your kind words :)
Spread The Word!! Super Producer Kenny Kapone has studio time available 404-919-6705
someone with a car should come scoop me.. being home on a Friday night is not a fun time..
if bein fresh to death is a crime i think its time for me to see a jury(;
yo I can't wait for that sole to sole album yo you already know R is going to promote like crazy
In a perfect world you'd be able to mark people as spam in real life
Having to get up early in the morning, but being to exited about #TeenWolf to sleep. Yep that's me right now. :))
*sigh* another long hair woman goes down... but at least it is for a great cause. :-)
I did! Sorry its been super busy, coming your way shortly!
I'm thinking about this for my blog post. (Not even articles, actually, and I'm really wondering there.)
WHAT ABOUT VIRGINIA? haha
Great presentation by ! The presentation was very helpful and intriguing. Fans, we suggest you #Follow &
My phone is like my sidekick it goes everywhere with me.
mehhh this made me so happy <3
Crew love >>
and hey ladies my bday party is tonight at around the corner in lakewood 11pm. Hope you can make it! Love ya!
#WorstBreakUpExcuses My sleeper cell has been activated. You know how it is.
I broke it on an icy sidewalk 4 years ago. It just gets worse and painful sometimes and incapacitates me.
Check it out and this goes out to everyone! Few of us been talking and We are celebrating Cody's bday TONIGHT at LINK LOUNGE 2901 fannin
"You're smiling, that means you like him!" I like six year old logic.
did that really just happen or
I'm a music nerd AND a Swedish nerd. HOW did I miss this? Oh why oh why wasn't I listening to this morning?!?
You should totally get your ears pierced! They'll look amazing! By the way, your british accent is amazing! <21
Omg Over Here In Dallas,Texas Its 2:40 a.m!(:
Baltimore: I-795 South is a MESS crawling from Owings Mills to the Beltway.
Hey ! Follow us!
Can anyone direct me to a comprehensive report of major campaign production costs relative to their ad spend, for different media?
Checked out the Tribe Called Quest Documentary #beats, rhymes and life real. Shout to Jarobi White the unseen but felt member of TCQ!
I like that they give it both ways in the song, A to Z, A to zed. For teaching purposes.
She Did Indeed Wens
I watch general hospital sometimes, do is one life to live characters permanent?
I used to have such a crush on Kevin Arnold from The Wonder Years. Not Paul though cuz he grew up to be Marilyn Manson. #isthattrue?
Is the naughty comedian mulling over the idea of marriage? He tells a British talk show it "would be good"!
is it really?
Me and You = Lunch date soon. Please.
Lagarde on ag subsidies: ag activities critical; room for impvmt in CAP; impt sector that needs 2B secured & protected.
If you ask me a question and I don't know the answer I'm going to tell you to google it and act like you're the stupid one
6th Annual Chili Cook-Off today!! I am going to pair our yummy Domaine Haegi Dry Riesling! Bring on the spice!!
a new project with an amazing partner begins. fun and exciting! once again i start with a mental model to develop a shared understanding.
gOiN to MaKe more CheEse....the norm..got to play good big sis, aka MOM to my 15 year old lil sis who doesnt learn from MY MISTAKES!!! ugh
Hahah I saw. You are a diva! Closeups banned in your contract?
Congratulations, Molly!
i had a change of heart lol
only 1% of all the water on Earth is fresh and able to meet the needs of humans. 97% is in oceans and 2% are in glaciers
Too fucking early.
put on your couch she's a hella funny civilian
NC folk-- I'll be back in Raleigh around March 15, until at least August! (I'm taking a breather for spring quarter.) Let's hang soon!
sittin by grandma for a lil bit and then havta get some rest before I head back out to the fields in the am to
Haha you caught me! Guess I gota learn to use that-them-there internet a bit better. That site's just too smart for me.
Awe I feel bad I can hear the autistic or retarded kid screaming :(
patanong mo yung akin. Thanks bro !
me too espically when I don't have my notes for an open note quiz. Fml
In some fields more than others; today more than tomorrow. #openscience #altmetrics arXiv, blogs, all changing dosages.
And now I'm home!
Uh. SSH. Yeah I know a thing or two. Like there are keys, public keys, and terminals. Whatcha need?
Shout out and #FF to these fabulous authors
Romney never misses an opportunity to miss an opportunity!
#ilaughalotwhen someone trips or falls or hurts themselves ... Hahahaha I can't help it
Just want to take this moment to give love to all the people who fuck with us and have been there to support us so far, we love you all
y'all should've took me !
want to see something really funny? Go to YouTube type Grandson gets brain freeze. It's the first one
We are a few days new to twitter! Follow us back! I promise you won't regret it!!!
How did I not know about Google Chrome browser sync??
i just voted for you gies in the #popoff follow me please!!
im at 5th period :P 2 more to go after this.
Kick up your feet and enjoy the sun today! Let us clean your house for 100 dollars off today only! Call 206-714-1140
Going to gym
That's what I call a real Bretzel! öckenwagner lecker!
serious crunchover going on right now.
Goodluck with your xfactor audition Amanda! You'll do great! (:
#20thingsAboutMe when I was 4 I got in a shark attack in Australia:/ but I'm all good now(:
Followers if you dont believe me about blastoff my father booked southwest flight on Blastoff, now im 4$ richer for doing nothing
What's your favorite Rob Michaels song? What track MUST stay in or be added to our new set?
tell me about it. I'm missing them HARD. Come back !
It's like the Black Sabbath reunion. Ha ha. Maybe Slash likes to have more control than he needs...
What you did there? I see it. And shake my head. ;-)
Use the content your museums have to START the conversation, not as an end.
Just realized that Cedar Block is equal parts nutjob conspiracy theorist and pragmatic skeptic. Which side will win? Stay tuned.
Just got back from doctor's office. Son has strep confirmed. Poor little guy. He's on the sofa eating popsicles and watching tv.
Kemba Walker is making a concerted effort to get his teammates involved early against MSU. He knows he cant do it alone.
I'll shooting there too. See you around the pool....
"Sometimes a girl just has to be a bitch, doesn’t mean she truly is one, but in that moment it was necessary." Story of my life at men haha
I did. Finished several projects with her for 2-3 quarters.
can't began to trust anything you say
Keep reading about bipartisan support. Which means, like, one dude/dudette.[smashes monitor]
Hopefully not one of a kind for long...
Hey sun! Glad you've decided to grace #Baltimore with your presence again after a serious hiatus.
Just got my drivers license!
Sunday night! Steaks on the Foreman & a bottle of zin.
Coconut flavored yogurt is the best thing i've ever had...NOM NOM!
Ooolala! RT : We made antelope sliders topped with pancetta, smoked gouda, and horseradish mayo !
Ok I been up since 7am I need to eat n relax my brain is not functioning @ all..its a shame how I really can't function w/ out 8hrs of sleep
This new cast member rocks. For some reason I can't remember her name o.o
Stopped by 16 Handles to get yogurt for later. My second trip today. I know, not your fav. Love Red Mango b did not want to drive.
Can not Keep the New "SNOCLOTHING" American Rebel's T-Shirt's in Stock. Next Shipment March 2012, Orders yours..www.SNOCLOTHING.com
just here to help babe
Gettin all smart-phone-y with it.
SFCaT –SF Cultural Arts Traditions- hired a Marin PR agency to handle the Mission's biggest Latino event, Carnaval. Qué viva la tradición.
On behalf of Roxie, BearBear tweets :Yummy in my tummy.
I hope you feel better soon :)
Hella females who got big titties big asses love the dick but for a wifey that ain't enough those are a dime a dozen.
I'm 99% sure I just saw/heard a mopedder singing "Rack City"
West Allis says "Corporations aren't people, my friend."
I didn't run into anyone I know today. Guess who's wearing the exact same thing tomorrow.
You are a joke. No consistency at all. Are you still hooking up with your teammates wifes and girlfriends?
All i need
Everything around us is made up of energy. To attract positive things in your life, start by giving off positive energy
More image selections tonight with hopes of getting to some retouching...
Yea.. I get off in a hr.. Bout to be on that same shit!!!💰
When u around positive ppl sumthin positive gotta happen
best. feeling. ever. RT : OMG I see the end of my inbox in all of its white glory!
Nigel Slater&#39;s pigeon casserole and banana trifle recipes
RT "Satan is btr thn nobody; nobody is btr than God; so Satan is btr thn God" & "a=1,b=.5,a-->b&&b>a--" r funny in same way
this day could have been better. grr. anywayyss happy birthdayy hope you have a live one.
Finally the weather at Moses Pointe has arrived. Call (509)764-2275 for a tee time at one of the best courses in the State of Washington.
Tell us about your favorite #Preservation #Archaeology #Interpretation #History projects and programs at creativemitigation.com
It's time for our annual staff training! We'll be checking email/voicemail and will get back to you in 48 hours.
♥ célébrez l'amour ♥ - Happy Valentine's Day!
I have yet to read the article, nevertheless bravo for havin' the balls to say the Rev Allholiness Alexie is wrong haha
This weekend is going to be very sunny, can't wait!
another one of those nights (;
When does the S &P downgrade the Kardashians?
People who are content with nothing but lust for everything should 👉😲🔫
well obviously the best night ever was my bday party this summer when I got to see you (minus the whole singing chicken thing)
If it belongs to someone, say their. If it's a location or you're pointing out something, say there. Say "they are" to see if they're works.
The Vow!
RT RT : mark your calendars. RBC Annual Holiday Open House tomorrow 4pm. on.fb.me/rM9AfD see you there!
oh btw, if you need free internet to upload photos, you're more than welcome to come by my place tonight.
thank you for the birthday wishes (:
Simmer down, everyone. We are awesome.
I think any night but Tues
wassup lady how u been
RT : Was impressed by some of the #wonk presentations in Prof Grier's marketing class this week. Way to go
It's a Beary Special Day-- Happy 109th Birthday Teddy Bear! Have you hugged your Teddy today? :)
please add a seattle tour! #Bring1DtoSeattle 35
lol no hate... I almost cried I felt so bad..
3/13/1789->F. Hopkinson:...For you know they say “a word to the wise is enough”—and why not to the witty?
we need to try and talk more :(
the record comes out TOMORROW! A year in the making... here we go!
Is it weird that I always read your tweets with your accent in my mind?
You're very welcome :)
me to what type of food do you like. i love greek food
Make holidays that much brighter. Help a foster child in need...
MT : Congratulations Mitt Romney. Unlike , people actually remember you from high school.
Support Small Business!!
Thankfully we were upgraded to a different flight. It was super creepy!
Helping to curate our sexy upcoming boom-chica-wow date night in a box for All I can think is my parents subscribe to the box.
back from the georgia aquarium w/kelsey's class.
Yeah she is so fucking mean!!
2. Slurping Turtle Chef Takashi Yagihashi from Bucktown's Takashi, plans to open another restaurant on Hubbard Street
Say hey to our new followers!
I GET MONEY, WAT U KNW ABOUT IT.
heey feel like i havent seen u in madd long
I believe it's healthy for any society to be allowed to say you don't like a book, which is what Bradfield's essay is about
You can?t build a reputation on what you?re going to do. Henry Ford
Happy Friday. Sun for the next couple days = lake time.
a blazer presser is like writing a story with invisible ink
can I get a data visualization of "kabillion"?
Happy 4/20! The day everything goes green
Who doesn't love a free show? Tonight, my new band Low Hanging Wires is playing at baba budans near the university of cincinnati campus.
After many year of hiatus,I biked @ least 15 miles 2day if not more! I feel great & sun-burnt!
;) RT : Fresh out the shower #Teamclean!!
let me know if you want to talk with her--she's knows lots of other business mumbo jumbo words and is a real expert in the field.
bitch I hope u die a painful death u a racist hoe & all yall black ppl that support her yall can suck a dick & die with her
it is the best shopping ever!!! I used to live there and want to move back so badly. I love the whole area really.
threw a bunch of veggies, peppers, and stuff into a stock pot! Cross your fingers for tasty bloody marys!
wing ding head ass boi
Boom or Bust: Cano will be the only Yankee to hit above .300 this year
You know... Mike Smith would be perfect on the Canucks.
Almost finished working for the day woo!
My wife asked me to watch the real housewives of jersey with her...should I run away or do it?
Come at me bro!
I have a theory. :) The work we love most brings anxieties about not doing it justice.
I'm doing fine,and how are you and the team after a good win lastnight
I wish would come sing to my daughter for her first birthday. :c
HA! IDK bout him but I've Bern taking a lot!
4 WAYS TO REACH GOD: look back and thank god look forward and trust god look around and serve god look within and find god
Trust me, there are enough genealogists on twitter to create a trending topic
Sitting in this parking lot that is 95... Except it's 95 North!!
You live in Texas? ;)
Darn - I don't shop there! Will it be more widely available soon?
yeah! paper plates! But if you get the mole, you either get plastic OR you might get 2 paper plates. Superfun place, though.
"Speak kind words and you'll hear kind echoes!"
so proud to be
I'm upset. I think it's time to bake!
I done seen some ratchet shit in my life but THIS SHIT RIGHT HERE?? Smh... These girls need their fathers desperately....
TY for the #FF Love! Have a blast in KY!
I'm not doing shit today ;) x
Reef Commandment # 5. NEVER step on the Sea Oats on the beach or the Sea Grass in the salt water. Both are VITAL plant life 4 beach and sea
not random at all, they've been making waves with their recordings for years now.
Omg. :O that was fucking amazing.
district champs!
Obviously mine. I'm sure she doesn't wanna be on a team with a bitch ass nigga
Riding in the Tour de Cure (Diabetes) on Sun. 61 mile ride leaves fr the Queen Mary over the bridges to Palos Verdes and back.
You're most welcome!
Don't have time for the bullshit today
Any Cooder Graw fans?? Just confirmed that we're going to open for them at Rio Brazos in Granbury on August 4th!
thanks, bug.
Oh, I like her!!!!!! She's lovely!!! Thanks Sahota! :B
I'm Hype birthday in 8 more days (:
come out & PLAY KICKBALL on picture day tomorrow 6:30 Bryte Park! RT if you agree NFL legend Del Rodgers should join!
Absolutely blown away by our team at !
Couldnt have had a better night:)<3
we had time against us and miles between us
And I just took that last thing. Cc
Understandable, considering the imagery. Still shuffling mine...
Wow today I regretted telling that one person but this post makes it all better(:<3
Hot. Sticky. Monsoons. Lightning. Thunder. Yep, officially summer time in North Florida. (thankful it held off until after #theplayers)
son! when u showed me that subliminal line i couldnt believe my ears! thats real talk!
bad day fishing is better than a good day at work.
Dude. Just saw you were following me. Welcome to the twitter thingy. Hope you and yours are good.
thanks for the follow! Love your words of inspiration.
I changed my name to support Elise!
Im in the mood for a hotdog.
That he did exactly what Jermaine Dye did and Dye only got 2 games?
One Sunday Morning
I really wanted to make a GPS joke but gave up after 30 seconds of thinking. Well done.
Cody Ross is the clean up hitter for the Red Sox tonight. Wow. From Manny in 2007 to this...
Have a great time playing with Gray tonight. He may be the coolest thing ever. These kids learn SO fast!
-hey, imu too
thank you, well, talking about garnish cheeses, although queso fresco is more common.
New post on quick, intense, and efficient workouts coming shortly
What the heck is wrong with facebook? Why can't I log in?
That's a homer. Clear as day.
For this Morning i Finshed another 3 Chapter Short Story Called Though You are Lost. Though now it's another Day wow!!!
nice! Glad it worked out
unfortunately, yes.
awesome can't wait for the Cleveland show man, thanks.
I see no snow
Chances are good the #Mariners will lead the AL for 2nd season in row in low-score Ws & Ls.
Surprisingly mine is still around over a year later
#NOIData - Bill Russell: Identify support via party, NCEC Data, models, support IDs, demographics from polling. Transfer data into actions
Just rocked a 6-3 win at indoor tonight!!!
add/like Western Scene...
I always send my baby the cutest goodmorning texts <33
Oh no! what's wrong with the pup??
Wendy Williams said Pooch & Tia won't be on the Game next season 😳
PFR not close
Hockey! Hockey! Hockey! $10 tickets to Saturday's Indy Ice game! Proceeds go to Indy Reads (when you buy from us). Call 275-4040 for tix
Watching fresh prince cuz it's the shiznit
When a song actually tells a story >
Somebody better follow me right now damnit!!!!
thank U 4 showing me love my Brother! Right back @ U FAM.
What happens on YouTube stays in Vegas.
Currently down 10-5 to Time to make a comeback lol
Awesome! We're in my room. Door's unlocked. you come too!
#ThingsIONLike girl who claim they gt high standards but mess wit a dude that treats them like quenns lol wats wronq wit em
Hunger Games & Twilight obvs should of won but kids don't read that so diary of a wimpy kid won.
I say nay. Not even for the violence, but for the subtleties -- miss those, and it's a book about kids killing kids.
should Awards a grant of $2000 to help small business owners develop businesses. We need help to hire people
coming along :)
Back in the trap lml
do I?
Great calls with Strategy Financial Group, Filmetrics and Waffil today. Really cool clients. Makes me guilty to take days off at beach!
HEY! RT If you include a middle initial, You're 99%more likely to be a douche-> Are you ashamed to be a 99% er?
fun! i'm getting over this horrible cold so have a lot of catching up to do :/ it's sunny though so i'm not complaining!
I changed it. thanks man.
Thanks for the awesome breakfast and great speakers. Be a choser!
America lost a truly remarkable WWII vet today. My husband's 92 grandfather died. A strong, kind human. The best of the best? Yes.
I REALLY want austin to clear this up. He NEEDS to come online and explain EVERYTHING.
RT My friendships are based on can we get money together if u can't then we can't b friends ! U gotta have that appeal
if you're interested, you can find him here
the #bruins lost ...oh well. #NFLDRAFT starts tomorrow, best weekend of the year.
Thurminator, you talk to Mario Williams at all this week? or did Jimbo hog him?
No bbq 4 u!
That's the exact same thing I said! ": omg so jealous. Mars Volta >>>>> Soundgarden though"
Hello DC!
THIS: “He slept curled against her back, a dark comma against her pale elegant phrase.” - A. S. Byatt
Sad about NC. But glad used Kim Kardashian 72-day marriage vs. a gay couple together for 20-years example, why does it matter?
My mom needs to keep her word. Don't say you're gonna do something if you're not going to. -.-
I don't need to hope anymore because I'm tired of being disappointed
Save an additional 20% off ALL sale items! Use coupon code: EXTRA when you checkout. Don't miss out on this big sale going on right now.
Jesus You are Lord of all! :)
Tablet is sugary and crumbly, not creamy and chewy.
Glad to hear!
I sure you will rock the runway!!
Wud up tweeps its #CincoDeMayweather weekend be safe and enjoy the festivities
ohh I see...well my internet on my computer is a tweak so :/
Checked out the page. Sounds interesting, very interesting! Who are you trying to sell this to? Ford? Chevy? Tesla? VW?
bite your tongue sir.
We have lost one of the greatest visionary and creative geniuses of our time today, RIP Steve Jobs
This one girl gave me a hug out of no where. Smelled like kiwi(:
Coldplay.... Your new tracks are weak
s/o to the profs. who have to read a million papers, correct a million exams and get grades in like tomorrow lol
please follow me please me please please
hi my name is Allison and I'm going to bed crying because Madison DMd everyone back but me.
Just sent my second check of the year to Planned Parenthood. What are you doing for reproductive rights and health?
this friday, lets turn up
I'm tweeting when I shouldn't be.
lmao The Edge of Glory is about edging right?
ahh, wish I was going. I had to back out of GDC this year :(
“: RT if you use a blow dryer, curling iron, or flat iron on your hair.” flat iron!
I don't remember you being a cheerleader?
Let me know which you like?
Coach Tortorella - "If we’re tired this time of the year, there’s something the matter. We still have a month to play."
Can I see your syllabus for this class by any chance?
(c) and i bought ONLY 2 tickets for me and my friend and she is 14 and by the time of the concert i will be 14 to so idk
Glad all you Paul Martin haters refused to challenge me on asking why you hate him so much. Proves you don't know a goddamn thing.
Every minute I spend reading about someone elses success is a minute that *I* am not being successful.
Unless I feel like I really fucked up, I don't kiss ass to no one.
Glee is number 1 on TV Shows <3
When the heck do we get our yearbooks
Chatting with another location about food allergies
#ItsInsaneHow fashion could make people pass up there soul mate.
Like Chandler Jones go up and get by #Patriots. They needed youth to replace a lot of pass rush production with this versatile end
The Giants are out of challenges, amongst other things!
No thanks
Ok what are you referring to? :-) the google doodle?
#Top100Lies "I'm fine"
What is your take on this whole NICKI MINAJ and LIL KIM beef?
Pizza boy must have eaten the veggie pizza I sent to! Sorry, dude. ;)
fun night with !(:
I'm not one to take up too much couch time...I'm a bed girl :)
steel design is a sucky bitch....
Thanks for the shout last week - sold it!!
happy birthday bony tony!
what up Jerzzzzz
Detroit WIN Opening Day 3-2 thanks to a bases loaded Austin Jackson single in the bottom of the 9th! is back!
good luck Jim!
He's gotta camp, but I think he ends up at OSU.
I'm from Edmonds. You?
you forgot to mention they did this all at 830am. Lol
Thank for all for the comments and likes. Please reshare if you can or invite your friends over. Thanks again
Happy Mother's Day Mommy!! I Love You!
I've been told I'm dark and fizzy too! :-p
"slizzard" is one of 's favorite new words.
alas, we are closed Tuesdays! Does another day work?
glad im got ma car cause it showed the fakes from.the real
I should prob never have kids. Today Show story abt kids gettin high on hand sanitizer & my first thought was "does it work?"
Cheers party planning committee !
la people bitch too much about people saying this isn't a hockey town...well I can see why they are so unwelcoming
I'm a lone wolf. I need me time. Clinging just makes me want that person around even less.
Just paid my speeding ticket. $161. Ridiculous. No one goes the "speed limit" downtown. Careful, everyone, on Broadway. It's 30mph, not 45.
Got a tip for a dance audition that fits in a tweet, what is it?
We're still setting up. Check back 2p.
btw is that u in your profile pic?
Should I be concerned that my doctor gave me a steroid to take that they give to animals... Including horses?
Planing on not missing one bell of school until its over
If someone doesn't let me out (DAD) I'm going to take my morning poop in the living room!
Those were definitely some parties. Very intimate vibe. We're only moving forward - and hope you're along for the ride!
I love your cute voice, I love your hugs, I love your kisses but most importantly i love you <3
I know you're not. Too much stress is not good. What degree are you working for? Have I asked you that already?
I changed it using the twitter app... if I use tweetcaster I'm gonna have to crop out ur logo to make it fit
But you went away, how dare you, I miss you.. 
Checked #gameofthrones out of the #library! Psyched to start reading it!
He will turn it back on..He keeps saying that he is looking out for her but not the way someone that doesn't care
I'm headed over there tonight.
Yes, wisely and wildly spent! MT : More public investment would be nice too MT
Master of the mix launch party @ Club Amnesia.. Free mixed smirnoff drinks!
Crying like a baby as the eighth banner drops at Rupp!!!!
fine. Not that there's anything wrong with that.
Well done is better than well said. -Benjamin Franklin
I Believe I Can Fly - I Believe I Can Touch the Sky
it's only 7:00 and I feel tired as fuck.#imgettingold:(
how's closing?!?? loll
Just changed my twitter password. I am not trying to get a free ipad.
nah dawg not yet
Just finished delivering ours...thank heavens, it's over! =)
btw, I smashed that food yesterday. Damn! And why don't u show ur smile on here? I seen it, you should showcase that.
In other news, I am in serious need of a haircut and a shave.
are you in south florida?
Just had an awesome lunch at Chuy's with my oldest friend in the industry. Now it's girl time with my best friend. Great Saturday!
Thanks so much for the support Robby. You rock!!! I hope you still keep up ur drumming :)
Nothing to lose,but everything to gain.
I need to keep up with times with all this new technology! Never knew how far behind I was til listening to the lectures
talking about covering Japanese earthquake w/ cell phone & netbook.
A tip of the cap to you, Brian Matusz
Smelly feet normally stem from too much perspiration mixed with bacteria. Drysol may help to control excessive moisture/odor.
not if he's dea...I mean yeah that's fine!!
Now that's a career change RT Dr. Suess wrote X-rated adult books before writing children's books.
Wholly smokes! THIS IS IT! :-D
I dislike when people make up excuses that only make sense to themselves....
=QUESTION= What types of deals, contests, prizes, etc. would you like to see from us now and in coming semesters? Comment and let us know!
Trying to be good this week, but 1/2 price appetizers all night at and CAPS tonight! Must resist!
Democrats that defect from the President's position on not building the Keystone Pipeline are in danger of getting hosed by their own party.
Three focal points: educate, income, and health.
Special thanks to my friend JD for supporting the book and the gifts she sent me from London & Paris.
Prayers go out to the loved ones of Joe Paterno RIP
See ya Tuesday. We are exhausted!
Groce's best player DJ Cooper is from Chicago, he also helped Ohio State land Evan Turner from Chicago....certainly knows that state
I was told the same thing. I said "You're about the tea; I'm about the cookie."
No. You didn't see the whole thing.
LOL that he did!!!
sorry about that! I must go public! I'll do it in a minute. : )
it's about time u twitted me back! I miss u
It's hard to "HUMP" with a thrown out back but I'll do it for you! : ) HUMPS! xoxo
gym time!
Girll i most defly is r ??
Heard a story today of older Professor who has admin print off all emails then Prof dictates replies for each email for admin to send.
But you're a strong finisher!!!!
That's another great reason to know about you..If I can figure out this tweeting thing, I'll retweet your stuff..Gotta learn
Well, what are you looking for? :)
lol yea i did
apparently, you can't go very far without an alternator. and i always seem to find the most inconvenient turn lane to become disabled in.
And until hubby gets home I am going to piece together some mug rugs and quilt the place mats I am making for my sister.
If people only knew what was playing in my headphones while working out...
Happy Birthday to one of my fave football players of all time !!
when ur parent makes up lyrics to ur favorite song just so they can try and sing it with you in the car and its so annoying
: I would rather have eyes that cannot see; ears that cannot hear; lips that cannot speak, than a heart that cannot love. <333
picking on the defenseless, battery-dead?
Can't sleep.
Thanks for the follow! Where are you located? Please let me know how we may be of service. ~Linda :o)
Leonardo Decaprio was a babe when he was a teenager (: haha
I'm just going to say it: I *love*
« let yo next move be yo best move»
The only limits to the possibilities in your life tomorrow are the buts you use today
Missouri ruined my bracket but dook losing to a #15 makes it all worth it.
Say it's not so! cc: NO how did i not know Betsey Johnson is bankrupt and closing?!?!?!?!?!?
RT So I wonder what the hell is going on, & what Jim Dever is doing w/that chicken. <<<--Chicken?
No tobacco, day 5. .. check. Not too bad...
my grandma was 67 and senile, regardless u need a FURBY
Holy Shit is she kin to Debbie the pet lady?
I'm bored.... (._. ) TODAY IS CINCO DE MAYO THOUGH :D
you wanna be in the in circle so bad
hope this its for reals misses you Artie
Set Of 36 1/8" Crystal Stud Earrings, 18 Pairs, On Nylon Posts In Multi
tell mlb network that thanks
Having dreams about someone who isn't in your life anymore<<< 😔
Are you a Norwegian fisherman?(;
freak'n love!
when are you headin back?
thats right and the boss will make you sleep on the couch
! Happy Opening my friends!! What a talented group and such beautiful people.
At 1st game of the #Mavs playoff series. Go Mavs!!
can you give me the quote for my air?
This bus driver is always so damn early . I have to freakin' run to catch it in time .
on with a photo of George Zimmerman's great grandfather - who is part African American.
Hello and welcome to twitter !
we'll be there soon!
Nah Kris...they cant win w/o Wade..coach/player spats happen here and there. Usually look worse than they actually are
The best advice to give someone is not to be a cliche
I hope I get the little girl I've always wanted (: #GoodLuck .
Pre-battle? Hm me thinks experience and the guy wins, thoughts?
Electron valence levels, dinner, Venus fly traps, Aqua Teen Hunger Force, and more...all in one verse
It's been a great day with a great breakfast, nap and a family bikeride. Now to plow through some writing assignments!
I have deep faith that the principle of the universe will be beautiful and simple.
Up in cali so good to b out here bac to vegas on sat
"There's an old Wayne Gretzky quote that I love. 'I skate to where the puck is going to be, not where it has been.' ...
did he beat the case??
go jets go you beadle pick jets over eagales love michelle
"Yes Kess Express" today's schedule: All welcome to a GO VOTE Rally at Croatian Club 4859 Eoff St. in Benwood from 1-3 pm, then ....
You're fucking #LAME if all u tweet r "Please follow me" & "Please DM me" tweets! If you were truly cool u don't need 2 ask 2 b followed
I think so too,and our blood line also lol
DO YOU WANNA GO TO THIS ASAP ROCKY SHOW IN POMONA? WE HAvE AN $$EXTRA TIC$$! Bring yo ASS To The Glasshouse and hit me!
I thought sushi was nasty, I guess it just depends on what kind you get lol
#3DAYS till naked teeth :) WOO <3 we wont be brace faces together :( BUT OH WELL YEEEEUHHH :)
we're u at nig
This is not real life
yes...just like in 'Tron'...lol
Belvedere's! 80s Night! 's birthday!
TONIGHT! SETTING SUN PART 2: a Broken Glass New Works playreading! See you there! Studio 2G!
Students get 1/2 off tickets at Brewers games on Friday nights? WHY DIDN'T I KNOW THIS EARLIER
hey I just met you, and this is crazy, but here's my number so
im very proud of i love him very much, i hope to be married to him one day.
Maybe I should be bold.. Can't I'm the female..sheet I want you to talk to me about you Not money,fame,or anything else! Just you blue eyes
Gotcha...That's Nathan. He should be back soon. That's my dude.
LOL!! We were just there! Amazing isn't it!!!
Worse lic plate "IMMENUR" WTF dude? Am I missing something...
HAHAHAHA LOVE IT!! glad everyone is enjoying it!
and I close my eyes and I can see a better day I close my eyes and pray I love y'all :)
Your not real you Fucking fake go get a life like for real, is real! And he has a girlfriend and he is not a jerk
looks like we have a case of the Tuesday's over here!!!
Hope you have a wonderful weekend.
I used to spend $45 for 3 CDs at Tower Records. Now I have Spotify on my phone. This is a weird moment.
Put it in neutral and hit the gas!!! Lmao
is on the big screen
Eat ya heart out and
Hi!! RT : in the mix at avant garden this wednesday, then top notch party sat. s/o dj (triple d)
jet set life
The Miz and Dolph Ziggler's entrance mash-up music should be called "Here to Play" or "Came to Show the World". So epic.
MT Judge Reinhardt: only purpose and effect of Prop 8 was to lessen status and dignity of gays and lesbians in Calif
I loved his last line! God IS great!
I sent a letter to the listserve coordinator re #thatdarnlist, first sentence: I find this thread to be completely useless and inane. Snap.
Mac let's not forget so does your music ": real talk! RT “: the business of music sucks.”"
You know you're a huge fan when you get chills everytime her name is mentioned on #ABDC tonight!
RT : The horns in every Chicago song sound like farts. - HA! That band sucked!
Can't sleep. Stress is affecting my health. Going to eat raw today, drink lots of water and have a nice run at lunch. Hope to feel better.
true statement. Not just the Heat, but anyone who plays like they have been, doesn't deserve to win! So Kudos to the pacers
While happy to have an NFL team back in the city, many #Baltimore residents were sympathetic to the rage of #Cleveland #Browns fans.
have you ever tried to laugh without smiling
“: we are going to be old ladys in nursing homes racing wheelchairs #BF4LP” you already know!!!!😜
lol I know right.. So ghetto.. Is this like a retweet or wat n can ppl see this lol
TWO DAY SCHOOL WEEK! :D
Would I be petty to stash this other burger for L8er?! #fuck'em
How is it even possible that Obama is tied with Romney in polls ? Romney should be ahead by a landslide 15+ pts !
Great lunch at ! Thanks go out to Molly and !
REEL INJUN + A GOOD DAY TO DIE are now on sale together for $349 with PPR, $249 without. Email us at to learn more.
I wish DVD manufacturers would always use the same cases, so we wouldn't have to have a dozen kinds of security measures.
and the tent?
that's something I ca Relate to. Sometimes you wish they would go back to not talking. Not often, but sometimes
searching thru craigslist and found a RoN Gronkowski jersey. ha
Oh, that's where you are today!
HI I see you
Want to honor mom on Mother's Day? Call her or pay her a visit & tell her you love her. Buying or wearing something pink says NOTHING.
Today, my office was the clothesline. Tonite, I get ready for a northbound train.
However, there is no doubt that the hidden charges involved in the purchase of replacement supplies will fasten you
candy is sweet lol I was sayin "aw" cuz you miss my giant ass lol
Another performance tonight
ha I showed this to the roommates yesterday, its awesome!
Loving wandering around LA casually mentioning that global warming doesn't exist and seeing the horrified faces of waiters and shopkeepers
If you haven't left for work yet....you're late. What a mess out there!!!!
It's entirely possible the most talked about person at the #natbookfest is that guy with the cat on the leash.
It's a 300 yr-old burial ground. Strangely beautiful, really. You'll have to come visit!
Hahaha!!!! Same here. RT : Zero. Hand me the whiskey.
With all these close calls it makes you wonder how many missed calls there were back in the day.
#wmnldrs Stand on the shoulders of those who came before you
LET'S GO HEAT!
Pilot strike grounds 124 flights Industrial action from Iberia pilots caused the airline to cancel 124 flights, affecting many people ret
Carly, I've been glued to twitter all day watching the stream of
OH!! you mean the stupid bitch, whore, slut, hoe, free ugly ass prostitute? Yeah, she's a retard :]
reply to my text message
No idea, I'm watching a stream. I don't get Fuel TV
My first tweet! :D
Monday Morning News: Jwow and I have something in common :) RT Love watching will and grace in the am
In the business center at the Marriott checking the THATCamp blog ... cuz internet in the room costs $9.95
Few more days until the weekend, can't wait!
RT : ": Very good start for your man " Zuuuuussss.
was reading: "He marveled at her beauty, sensuality and sexuality as she walked from him. He just wished she had done it before they met."
Did you take the time to close your eyes and place your lips to mine?♥
You're amazing!!!
He makes my whole day better.
VAS HAPPENING? heeyy!! you are AMAZAYN!!!! please follow me :) THANKS!! <3 you!
I agree! I need color in my life and white walls make me sad.
Got a full day of painting and drinking tomorrow. Better turn in!
lol no u not
It seems I have a particulary stupid Breitfart commemorating troll/bot that only RTs my insults into it's followers streams.
“: If you want me, show me. If you need me, tell me. If you have me, show me off. If I'm worth it, fight for me.”True tht
Some times you have to step back and say "you win". Turn and walk off with your head held high because you know that you did your best.
be at the football field tomorrow after school. You throw with basler and I'll throw with Bish.
That is awesome! WTG Men!
and if he broke up with selena i hope hes not with some other girl thats just like a no no llol
it's just a gag between us. Random comments keeps her on her toes.
Thank you Tiffany. Ask for me next time you come in so I can come out and say hi.
The joys of living with a significant other will never end.
at least in the mainstream talk ....very true! It breaks my heart!
Do it!
Instead, they pulled their sense of what the 'spirit' of the rule is straight out of their asses, and affected outrage over it.
Unless it is extremely windy O_o
The vinyl buyer at the hvd sq newbury comics really needs to GET WITH THE FUCKING PROGRAM!
naps are my fav
I met Justin's wife today. I tried to say hi to her, but then i realized i was talking to myself.
169 needs to be three lanes!
How did Mattingly handle it last year when Brox started blowing saves? Did he go committee or hand it 2 Guerra
Some people just dont understand when we dancers say that we use hair nets. We're not joking, people...
Thanks! Pop forever!
RT : Amazing that Twitter now gets as many API calls as Google gets searches (both ~3 billion/day according to public statements)
Q4) Planning, analysis, know the audience, be able to press the delete key
But the Less you have, The Less you have to lose...Look On The Bright Side Of Things
Is Megan sad? :(
What do you do when bored?
I'm sorry but physics just does not click with me.
Repairs planned for facade damaged seven years ago
I love Betty White! Bummed that I forgot to record her birthday show tonight, hopefully it'll be on again...
if only i could wear spanx and a sports bra to school...
A tiny five dollars can turn into a big bank account. Get the lowdown by sending an email to
People Be Stupid.
"It's better to refuse than to accept & not go"...African Proverb from Madagascar
Amazing day, so far my spring break has been good af
#belly2 stupid as ever
Every thought is a seed. If you plant crab apples, don't count on harvesting Golden Delicious. ~Bill Meyer
Follow ma promo page for all the latest
Thanks, Darrell. Very kind of you.
Martial arts movie night
Like All The Stuff You Said On Twitter And Then When U Saw Gabby U Didnt Lay An EYE On Her ! Neither Say A Word To Her...
that's all you can do baby!! Keep the grind. Miss you much!! One love
You are saved so don't talk like that! Don't walk like that! Don't try to fit in! YOU'RE SAVED!!!
First rehearsal tonight with our new dancers who joined the company - it should be good!
Yes! That sounds great! I need some pointers. And you need to come and visit. ;-D
Sunburned ... Sad face
yes 2 months I just love birthdays ahaha
Wow. The fufu really sits in your stomach like a brick. Not sure how I feel about Nigerian food so far.
aw me too i was born in december the 1st actually lol
“: I maybe late w/this idea, but have you put your fliers in OBGYN offices? I'm dropping off to mine!” yes we did!
it was amazing :) I loved it lol. I am cold right now D:
she always does that
I'm not Jake T. Austin.
why aren't you gonna be able to go home? :c i'm sorry!
is brilliant in Life's Too Short. kills it once again.
#TU finish the year strong! Focus on the obedience of today to unlock the purpose of tomorrow!
S/O to all undertaker fans be glad to see him in action again undertaker4 ever
I love you and i'm so proud of you<3
Mahomies gonna love :)
the view from this airport is magnificent!
Its much easier to eat a steak with a forkin' knife.....
They lost a package I had coming. Like completely lost it. Matt=pissed
follow me <3
Waste of time!!
oh i don't work for them, so i don't know. I havn't heard anything tho.
note that really got to me. He is a special young man and I'm glad he's my brother.
is so pretty, even wit minimal makeup.
Back in 1996 when the president also believed in #gaymarriage and was in a position to do something about it in IL, what did he do?
to overcome them. Life is beautiful.
MY ALL TIME FAVORITE SONG! !!!!
Good morning everyone!
Teacher sees phone "give it!" girl "no!" teacher "give it!!" girl shoves it down her bra "want it now?!?!?!?"
I just want to tell you how it isn't fair. But then I'd be the bad guy.
RT« good morning I love you.! And hope you have a great day.!»
Mom is paying more attention to her new cell phone then to me....I think I will have to kill it.........snort
Congrats to my boy , he's gunna do big things across the pond
Camilla you lost! They had a plan and it worked LOL karma back at you Lmao #BGC some1 got out smartest just saying
5 months ago i thought being friends with your ex is weird and awkward and i never understood why people did it...i understand now :)
Circulating Ideas podcast: speaks, among other topics, on ebooks, subject of upcoming workshop....
i'm having heart palpitations
We're excited - let us know when it does!
come in for lunch and see me and shannah and Dave
are you reading Critical Path too?
just got back from a morning workout! Feels so good lol gonna wash up and spend the day with family ❤👍
so good to see, along with Springer mashing lately
Nice work, ! Looking forward to working w/ as your director of industry relations & social media
Dont wish to have an easy life, wish to be a stronger person
at the Orpheum
#1111 #MakeAWish #AustinMahone plz look up on iTunes. He is an amazing singer. You'll love it!
We generally change ourselves for one of two reasons: inspiration or desperation.
Do you bring work home with you over the weekend or do you leave it in the office for Monday?
And Arian Foster just bowed goodnight on the Bengals' season..
Could it be... more tracking today!?
Crying just feels/sounds so much better right now.
#showbiz you already know ;) Mkay. I need to get some sleep. Ni-night Mr. The same amount of letters in all of our names. Aha!
#FAIL RT : Loudest cheer of the afternoon just came when Sox recorded final out of inning. Royals scored six runs in the ninth.
thanks dude, it felt pretty solid. Thanks for keeping the conversation in the twitterverse tubes alive.
We loves it! Hope you feel the same about Secret Skwirl. Best & success.
You love "that guy...." tweets haha.... and I only smell of pure goodness, duh
lol pulling an all nighter with my friend because of the hurricane!
I learn so much from my students. Apparently, high school kids still say "your mom."
Thanks! Just relieved it's apparently not my fault. RT : As soon as it's fixed we will let everyone know both here and on Facebook.
Lol trying to guard the Masked Mamba
Ha :P
Don't know if it's the new filters on the left, but Pubmed isn't playing nicely w/ my IE 7. Blah.
New generation is to worried about the colors of their parts. That stem as been one of the best stems I've own.
always so damn hungry... i could use some publix fried chicken right about now. lolol
woohoo! Gonna be epic!!! Stoked to work with you Jenn! <3 so grateful you could join us!
Vegas is not my kind of town,---that'd be Chicago. But still had fun last night.
Many of the people whom I follow have started complaining about Twitter and pondering its purpose. Is this the beginning of the end?
Big #ShoutOut to &
Climb high, climb far...your goal the sky, your aim, the stars.
#SallyAdams- "we create who we are every day" #YPABQ "Lunch With Leaders" sponsored by NM Business Weekly
Another Beautiful Spring day in INDY
Kalamazoo what's going on this weekend?
If you are in Real Estate and on Linkedin, let's connect to network
What war started the tiki craze in Amer? That would b WWII, as correctly answered by , plz DM us ur email!
Came home seeing an empty bag of what used to be sugar cookies. You would think after 15 cookies my dogs would be full
Excited to hear upcoming talk on SUG funded project on research support to historians with and
An ode to on tonight's Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery. And the funniest.
Heated ass fucked my parents are asshole. And should have mrs.wills thrown at them.
Were's my BFF at dead ass
derp. I guess i shoulda stayed in Ohio.
did the dog have a bony spine, horn on nose with thorny tail? That would have been a dead giveaway to the dog-a-saurus breed.
Energizer Bunny arrested, charged with battery
thanks for following! keep us in mind if you want to have a live karaoke band ever... my old bad was at SD HOB weekly all summer
Since Louie and William say "bong" Me and Arii say "get a job"
also, i love the god damn swedes.
Can't even describe how exciting the atmosphere here in New Orleans is. Tigers vs The Tide.
yea probably todayy if enough ppl show up.. somebody hit me up already too hoop today
ANY TIME!
You Only Live Nine Times... If you're
There are times when the simple dignity of movement can fulfill the function of a volume of words. ~Doris Humphrey
San Diego, California Weather :: 67F A FEW CLOUDS: 67F A FEW CLOUDS
heii I am a big fan of them hihi :)
Thanks for hosting today's 10th Anniversary luncheon and for your continued commitment to the women & daughters of
: thank you for your amazing support!
Beautiful day in TN looking at #beef #cattle and visiting with friends
haha I tweeted that yesterday, and it was 2 am, and I thought it was like 8, so my phone sent me a reminder that it's tomtom
thanks for the follow and look forward to working with u!
I think the folks at the National Federation of the Blind have some powerful vision for people who call themselves blind. Thanks NFB!
I want to marry him some day and have his last name..At this point i wldnt have it any other way---ms.williams bitches!!!
I am a half guy until I get it under 2 hours. That will be next year. The energy of 35k people is insane
Started not to give a fuck and stopped fearing the consequence Drinking every night because we drink to my accomplishments
In EMC "Accelerate business with Cloud" with &
Just finished watching Foo Fighters: Back & Forth. My love for Dave Grohl? So, SO big.
don't get me wrong it's a beautiful song.
I drink to make other people interesting. - ""George Jean Nathan"".
Needs a Cuddle Buddy.
My birthday is in 2 days
Thank you Ed!
Llife real complicated rite now but ya boi on his J.O.
Whatever, this weather is PERFECT.
Just watched Raw on DVR. Prediction: Big Show (fired last night), interferes, giving Laurinaitis the win. WWE can't lose top heel.
WarRoomOH: I'm in my own little world, but it's okay, I like it here. Everyone knows me.
All tax credits including homestead are applied before the surtax is calculated.
- true sir! Sorry i missed this, I never got a notification for it. Damn Twitter. Ha!
George Zimmerman is now in police custody.
Time to rest these cords... Need them to be strong 2mo am
The kingdom of God is within you. - Luke 17:21
Truth being brought this mornin' in the church house!
RT Come on New York!! (I hate rooting for them, but I am!)
for how much i only have 300
: A brand new day & a brand new week filled with brand new opportunities & experiences just waiting 2 be taken advantage of.
The best teacher I ever had taught me how to believe in myself!
send a direct message and i'll enter your entry
dude! your email address is spamming me and everyone else! its the yahoo one. I got good news! gimme a call sometime?
: "there are millions of people building the web, but i only have a couple engineers to crawl it."
wheres off season for you?
Everyone is pretty in there own way 💜
cold cold rain
Where can I email if I have a question?
on a plane back 2 MIA 4rm NYC. If we were on the same flight, I would've shared my bag of cookies and cupcakes w u. Bad model!
you should definitely come to Houston it's so much fun! Oh and please follow me?
Ok so I can't believe that there is legit 30 days till graduation! That is four weeks..
Laurie Santos just drew a distinction between "philosophizing" and doing real science... Pilosopher says ouch...
1D Get Naked would like it too much. ha.
We have tickets to our debut Vegas show! June 11 at area 170 with Only 8 bucks! We deliver! RT
awww..you know I love you Joe so much as my beautiful friend from Illinois :)
omg iv'e been 2 crowley b4!! thts so cool!! omg i want to meet u!! lol
THANKS FOR FOLLOWING! MUAH
m rabbit.
Considering this Memphis game tomorrow. Hm.....
Always a good thing to have, great bourbon leads to great ideas!
Last.fm > Pandora
z is gonna be the 2nd black person ever in Kodiak.. (Simon was first)
"Humber? How about Humbest?" Love it!
that isn't even fair! What an amazing shot!
per autograph you are getting
post-partum depression.
is excited for things to come.
Seeing space makes Consciousness want to fill it up with all we've got.
I mean, I sent it out to 12 major TV producers and maybe only 1 didn't get returned unopened. Was an eye-opener.
Opened Tweetdeck, said problem with all feeds. Logged out, now I can't log in. Disabled my firewall, still not working. Any suggestions?
We <3 our followers!
I can take you places you ain't never been before.
We Are Georgetown T-shirt: obviously office appropriate. Hoping to get out of here in time to watch the second half. HOYA SAXA!!!
What have you read lately that caught your attention (about studying in US)? Looking for inspiration today...
#Imagine You: I've heard some rumors about you dating a model... Harry: True. You: Wha-..? Harry: She's talking to me right now.
AWESOME soundtrack
#decalove excited for prelim awards!!
My fave is when the footnotes explain the bawdy references.
You don't seem to be very active on da twitterer lately.... #whaddupwitdat?
#IfITellYou how I feel, would you feel the same way too?
Just talked to a lady with a very thick southern accent. Kind of makes me want to eat at a Waffle House.
I know I got titans with , jets with , iggles with and browns with
You fuggin snore
#astd2012 - "I fail over and over again an that's why I succeed' - Michael Jordan. Basketball reference ... Now your talking my language lol
#schoolmemories flicking off the teacher everytime they turned their back!
follow #ethiosoccer in DC!!!!
Just saying. Sheesh, lighten up
Half Asleep in Poop Pajamas
EVERYONE FOLLOW THIS WISE MAN IMMEDIATELY! RT You are too young/ too handsome.
Startup folk: Do you add your investors to your general mailing list so they get to see emails that go out?
My nephew is lying next to me and talking about all the wonderful things that go through a 5-yr-old's mind.
thanks a lot Taylor! We'd love to see you again next time we come through town. Spread the word to your friends!!
Watching a master teacher using an effective metaphor to teach concluding sentences. We all need more time to observe each other. Best PD.
Life can knock you down, it can break your heart
win the lottery tonight and maybe it'll be possible for you
got a $5 gift card for buying Charmin toilet paper at #target !!! Guess who got a new pair of shoes?
I usually wash my hands b/c I like the scent of the soap, not because I want to have clean hands.
Man living at home is such a drag.
Studio Location Shopping. Excited!!!
Maybe I should hire you to do a website for me....
dissapointed in John Mayer's entire interview not just the N-word and black folks insults
But I digress
Keep it 3Hunna
I just finished a 2.25 mi run with Nike+ GPS.
The #newgirl is my new favorite show!! LOVES IT!
Let's keep the peace Oakland.
Respect used to be a joke when we were all young. And nowadays it seems to be the only thing we seek. Or maybe I'm just speaking for myself.
were u asking me what time it was here? If so, in PA it's 9:29
McGee is one of those dudes who will need to be traded around to be motivated until one vet or coach motivates him for every game
Are they ever gonna kick this retarded idiot Ron Artest out of the league? You can call a foul on this Bi Polar moron every play
The Lakers infuriate me as much as the Pirates. Stop playing down to the competition for once.
I'm actually so bad at graphics it swallows my whole day trying to figure things out.
#FF , a student-led nonprofit that hosted a fabulous event at last night!
Networking Group for Pathways/OI Partners clients meets tomorrow from 9:00-11:00 AM. Topic: "Networking & Personality Type."
of will be leaving the station. We wish him well in Boston :)
HILLARY CLINTON IS SPEAKING AT SYRACUSE ON MY BIRTHDAY
I was JUST listening to that song
thanks, I'm actually focused on creative video projects lately, but I might know some good folks for this
glad you're listening to your body
Hell yeah! And we just may win RT : You're alive! Sugar Bowl baby!!!
The school fair Is actually fun (:
RT : Cat/Dog first aid and CPR course on May 15 at Oregon Humane. Free. Register by emailing
so do I. The best fight the best Oscar fought everyone win or lose.
lmao, that's cute(:
Getting on the road back home soon.
What's up with Blazers? Lose Roy forever due to knee injuries and Odom hurts his knee and is out for the year. Call it the "Curse of Jordan"
After spending most of my first 17 years in dance classes, I'm not sure how I feel about going to a class tonight after a 6-year hiatus.
um have you been to a Bucks & Bulls game?
Several people tweeted the wonders of ALA Mobile Planner, searched twitter for info to dl and found none. Why am I not surprised?
I need that suzie in my life right now
Yikes! Hope all is well.
Doh! Sending password to myself (yes, in the clear) and accidentally cc'd . I'm classy like that.
Well crystal when will you be seeing richard?
...it does change and expand the context he can work within pretty significantly.
Love entered the front door, fear quietly exited the back. - DM
Nope. Same reason. I suppose you're an author like myself
could you please follow me I need more followers
Go ! RT : Listen to radio at 7 pm EST on Guests:
1 lucky family will win a family 4 pack of tickets to at the 2011 SDFE. See you there!!!
WALKING IN MEMPHIS, LETS GO GRIZZLES !
HaHa Jack Del Rio reunited with Drayton Florence
Heading to the Center for to get ready for our opening tonight. Come hang w/ us & see student photography in action! 6:30pm
I'm just one of a million guys watching loving some Zooey Deschanel.
Extreme and profound #beauty induces a feeling of loneliness so hard and tangible.
Jimmy Fallon is slow jamming the news with the president AND Dave Matthews is playing , & I haven't slept in 4 days and MUST. SLEEP.
• You can either watch or listen live, or watch or listen to archived games whenever you want. Games from other years too.
ABC Family totally rocks right now! hearing Dublin, Ireland, and Irish so many times in a row is making my heart hurt
It' a gorgeous day!!! I am enjoying coffee, bagel with Nutella and the scent of lilac. It's lilac season. Enjoy your day & take some water.
And now, I begin to learn this twitter dealie ... Yay, technology!
Recapping the President's plan to pull thousands of troops out of Afghanistan. Watch 19NewsNightcast
Going to olive garden in my dance costume ...
Lopez: "I was remembering just a few min prior to the accident her looking @ me & smiling & I'm thinking I'm never going to see that again."
youre my sister!! youre supposed to answer when i call you 7 times!!! lmao
I have no dog in the fight, I'm a Skins fan and a Falcons fan...but the team with the most BC'ers gets my vote, that's NYG.
Mischlers Florist for the perennial sale. And we'll go to lunch. Flower shopping in cold rain is a bummer! Did that last year!
Leather Feather 6/5 Bottom of the Hill As A People 6/7 Bottom of the Hill
Big jobs usually go to the men who prove their ability to outgrow small ones. -Ralph Waldo Emerson
Waiting in the Lobby of to be on with this morning!
RT : 2 entrees and a bottle of wine for $50 at Port of Call every Thursday night!
thank you
Those look delish !!! always loves a tasty little sweet!
Soakn n smokn listening to Pandora :) [Perfect]
back...not bad
I can't wait for the weekend !
lmfaoo, BET YOU HAVE CRABS OR AIDS!!! You know she messes around with her dogs up in her trailer park! lmfao.
I'm at Greenway Pub of that helps. You're the coolest!
now following
What is everyone up to tonight?
we're already following each other
Yaaaay about to board!
God will replace everything you lost. If He asks you to put something down, it's because He wants you to pick up something better.
itz hello I'n my way
I am really going to miss my dads 
just got your message, email is ,do you know anyone with credit card debt, story tonight
What you doing in NOLA? I'm from there, so let me know if you run out of debaucherous things to do!
Nothing can stop a determined heart.
Casa Latino is seeking for agents for south bay....pennisula area.
Tickets to the Aims hotel session with the Silver Sun Pickups coming up next!
I kno exactly how you feel
Travel Tip: If you take your pet abroad, check the embassy's requirements that must be met before a pet may be brought into the country.
Thanks for watching,
You got a Audie. Other than that...?
called hyponatremia (low salt) eat something salty, an hour youll feel better
with strawberries growing on them as mignardises?
... All we need now is a sharpshooting elf and a really pissed off dwarf. well and a few giant eagles.
Just started a new gig Co-workers are nice so far, if a littler taller than my last staff.
Thats how u know faith want it she even rt my tweet lnao
Don't usually pay attention to the NL. There's a dude named Buster on #SF ?! Hoping his real name is Byron, a la
What does that even mean? I just want some chocolate.
For good luck, Egyptian women pinch the bride on her wedding day. Ouch!
thunder/nuggets would be interesting to watch...youth vs youth
Our student book review blog is motivating our 5th graders. They've reviewed 150+ books so far & I buy those they recommend
Working out the kinks on our website so we can bring you even more great deals. Thanks for your patience!
#MostOverratedMusicArtists one Direction. Theres plenty more male groups... They just arnt obsessed over by the mass 12 year old girls.. Smh
Dropping people from FB's nice. Think of it as getting rid of crickets...or cockroaches.
Bomb Queen cosplay coming via a friends suggestion
Best baseball game ever? Bring on Game 7!
Hi everyone! If you participate in #gsmc remember it stands for Global.Social.Media.Chat. There is another 1 floating around, that is NOT us
Men plz remeber: DON'T DO THINGS IN THE BEGINNING THAT UR UNABLE TO DO TIL THE END
Too far, lol.
This is why I hate shopping with her.
so whens this wine/blunt nightt we always talk so highly about
I'm about to cry this isn't even funny -.- I love him so much..
If you can't win, quit like I do
Rumors true: Clooney was at WH lobbying the President on Sudan this afternoon.
Get your tushie out here!
I'm watching but prolly same. Think people could make bank with in/out quick. Even after IPO. Remember when yahoo was good trade. ;)
It's Monday, what 2 steps can you take today to move you towards your goals? Yes, only 2. Keep it simple, avoid overwhelm.
when libraries are taken down, their states fail with them
I've accomplished my job as Master Pot Stirrer today. I'll probably regret this decision!
Check Out Fresco Fay On Sound Cloud....Debut Album Coming Soon!!!
oh boy
I know! I think my mom attracts them. she once watched a bowl of salad fly off her counter when home alone...
Yes, I am, crazy week for me....how was yours?
oh the things I gotta tell u gurl that be goin downs lmfao.
I want a tumblr; so I'm going to go make one.
My back hurts, my neck hurts,y calve hurts....... :|
carson daly? RT Still thinking about the Carson special from last night... If you haven't already, set your VCR's.
do you know how long it is? maybe i'll do it in parts. its just my internet is insanely slow and i dont have the patience,
Listening to Albioni....
We need a written assurance from Enda Kenny that our CT rate will not change
Yeah, especially since it's usually a wasted exercise
Paddycake, Paddycake, baker’s man, Bake me a cake as fast as you can! In addtion to cakes, we've got brownies and blondies for only $1 each!
Y'all ever just knew somebody did some shit, but you can't prove it. But there's little to no doubt about what's going on.
so is it gonna happen??
I just hope they understand before anything im a man.
Tomorrow we will be making a very important announcement...life changing...life is powerful
Thank you 4 helping
Sending chocolate because you can never have too much!
if only there were still men like Noah in the world
O another game 7, Grizzlies & Clippers who we got
Need a big night from the
I hope you do too!
To get a letter, write a letter.
cool story, bro. tell it again.
If we show up, is that stalking?
are LOSING. missed the session :/
Also, the house band at 's event is killing it. Manu chao, outkast, nate dogg, and a great snoop cover.
Inland Empire African American Redistricting Coalition is presenting Assembly districts
May 13 - 19 is honored as National Women's Health Week.
i dont need to cuz mines made tht much in one day. Now whos in beast mode? #Mr. Wiggles
Trucks should not have spoilers.
#NeverShouldYouEver make your girlfriend/boyfriend feel like that have competition.
That lady is beast on keys!
would you renew your season tickets for next year if it's like this season?
Don't you mean .... it WILL be? <dun dun DUH>
We're are going to continue giving away free stickers if we can help get donations to cover the costs!
There are few players in baseball I dislike more than Reed Johnson. If he would have scored, I'd have been pissed.
follow bAck
NBA finally catching up to the NFL with stylish fan apparel
Does anyone know any good tubing spots?
Jersey shore, VMA's, Kardashians, on the couch, don't bug me.
i think getting your tweets 2 my phone is amazing! #FollowBack? <3
what would you like to know about the tournament?
just a quick chat (skype?) to get your perspective on the site. do you consider yourself a fan?
yep, come on in!
of course I understand u! I know how hard it can be to study a foreign language!! Yes it's so great I always enjoy it :)
Happy holidays from all of us at Critical Exposure.
Thank you for the follow! Love that your coffee can change lives!
"Sunny, one so true,we love having you." Thank you for the truth that you bring
is so based.
“Media studies... are central to our early 21st century world. New knowledge is emerging.” via Dr. Bernard Luskin,
lol 17 bro time to smoke weed
Cool dad. Got me a whopper for lunch. I may die.
It look so nice outside but the sky looks scary..
why has no one asked if is willing to change his # again? Ben Uzoh is wearing 6 for the
the kind of love Stefan and Elena have together only grows stronger,please tell me Elena will soon show her love for Stefan soon?
RIP Les Paul
Cause you're a freaking ninja!!
Somewhere in Stillwater, Keiton Page is wondering why #Lin couldn't have "turned it up a notch" against the
with such a mild winter, do you think it's going to be another crazy hot #summer?
Just created an account, can't log in. Reset the password twice, no go. What to do?
I've been training muay thai about 1.5 years now. I joined my gyms fight team last week, and looking at a fight in July.
love your songss!!! and please follow back
Feeling funny today.
Wish the #bruins could save some of this awesomeness for the stretch.
Brainstorm: bring the Council's reading & discussion programs to NYS penitentiaries! Could call it "Prose & Cons."
Happy Friday to you!
Wow, Sports Direct @ St James's Park drops the St. James's Park, good job Mike Ashley, way to spend your good-will reserve
Tomorrow is Friday! What a week!
Inception is 17 for Blue ray/ DVD combo at target.
I should just live on my own. My parents are never here anyways so why not!?.
It took me 15 minutes to find some honey roasted nuts. It feels like they jusy haphazardly threw this store together. Bread and nuts?
hahaha it's funny. How'd you take group pictures? We never got to do that either.
Our Not so Traditional, not so fried, Friday Fish Features are getting Rave Reviews! If you haven't checked it out make plans for this week
hahahahahahaha dumb ass !!! xD i miss my rebel
haha people are like starin at me
Wearing your guy's sweatpants >>>>>
and, quiet, too.
blossoms now?
I know, man. I get excited when I see myself, too.
Oh Chris, I'm just getting started.
• Like If 8 Packs Are Better Then 6..(; • Comment If 6 Packs Are Better The 8..
lol yeah you did.
Wishing i was in a hot tub! #Cold <<<<
i almost died cause i didnt eat anything today. But i beat my time but a min. And a half ^.^
so so happy for you!
Ryan Has been watching to much "Babe"
Congrats Margaret! RT : Huge congrats to SUNY-Buffalo's on being the newest Brittain Postdoctoral Fellow!
Saw your last tweet. Check out our website www.stardesignsa.com . Maybe we can help you find exactly what you are looking for. :)
wait...do you groove to jams, or jam to grooves?
No question. It's just amazing that swapping out that one piece made such a HUGE difference.
The language you use of "poor blacks" and "repressed".... Has racist undertones.
“: Im down with the fitness team, #TeamFitness.” all day every day
I'm starved !!!
He saw you. He wanted you. He liked you. He got you. He had you. He loves you. He got bored. He left.
10 minute nap 💤
Shidd this game a blowout
Second semester is going by extremely fast! Woohoo
About to go outside and play in the snow
"Stewed, screwed, and a neighbor for food" Zombie Housewives of the apocalypse
when the deans love you and don't check your bag but. heck everyone else's
you're welcome hun :)
Blast kills the power play, both teams back to equal strength
"Let's See Today's Plan, Spend Time With My OG, Than Go DownTown After All That, Available To Come Outside.!
i have got 32 #homeless people out of 3homelessness. i clothe and feed #homeless weekly also. PTL!
So water polo star Tony Azevedo goes down in trading card error lore with Billy Ripken and Carlos Beltran (Juan LeBron), among other greats.
It totally a prime spot - lots of sun. I'm not sure I'm ready for someone to sit there yet. Still adjusting.
Thanks, Kelly!
It makes up for the Belmont picks. WTF was I thinking.
are you in Utica please say yes.
So missed my flight last night but on my way home now, tired and excited to be heading home
you need to be specific. Lol
Holy frack, Bridesmaids was hilarious!
I love you too. I needed that!!! had a blast with you. Thanks. RT : I love my sis
For my Mom to make up for this weekend's pages by setting a major scene in one of her FAVORITE places! #NoDanFogelberg ( knows )
Happy for Corey Wooten as a Cats fan. As a Bears fan, I hope his knee is ok.
Oh loll.. Just making sure...
Is wondering why some people on twitter want that professional image and yet they have no picture of themselves or their business.
how u get all them followers lol
Friday at last! Atlanta, have any fun plans for the weekend? Been out to catch a game yet? Still first in our division!
Watching the editing, mixing and mastering process is an invaluable lesson - don't skip out on it. Just sit and observe and learn!
Nature is not only all that is visible to the eye — it also includes the inner pictures of the soul
So is any teenager who can sing and has long hair considered another Justin Bieber?
yup I still got my blackberry though
Today is the day Opens for Season Pass Holders! Open to the public next Sat. w/ Dora the Explorer & SpongeBob SquarePants!
Semi-randomly, is it just me or is the gender messaging in beer commercials & other football-time ads particularly objectionable this year?
you make my life so easy!! Thank you.
nice playing tonight! 10 boards is real nice work. Huge role for u at arizona next year. Can't wait to watch the team jell.
#5Myths only hillbillys, rednecks, and country folk are from Nashville.
any movie out that you wanna see?
Submitted The Advocator concept to the challenge to win 10K. It was approved! Looking forward to becoming a finalist.
My bf has perfect date ideas. Go to the mall, eat, go home, eat hot cheetos, watch lion king, have sex, take a shower, have sex, cuddle.
It's only fair to include Seattle to the tour. After all, we're the only city from the challenge excluded :(
Thanks for the Reminder!
I sometimes want to walk around in your brain. It would probably be a musical, like West Side Story.
Follow ,this is not a promo im just saying ,he follows back follow ,him its free
Are you going to verify credibility of that poll? 451 said they'll vote in dem primary, but <350 were Dem.
Well no. I usually have 2 :)
You now know about #studyday but do you know about StudyBlue? Come check out our online flashcards at the tutor desk.
Hello everyone plz follow n I follow back 
Confidential to library peeps: My library added a LibraryH3lp chat box to our Ebsco products! We're excited to see how much traffic we get.
See you Monday 6:30pm at the YW. Now is a time to "make it plain" & make it right
Nothing better than chips ahoy cookies, my snuggie, and a Martin episode to relax from a long day of work!
sweet a freakin air check session (in Don Imis voice)
"use protection unless you want her second child to be your first mistake" I speak wise words.
Just saw Justin bieber and Mariah carry's NEW CHRISTMAS music video. ALL I WANT FOR CHRISTMAS IS YOU. It was awesome;) want it on my iPad.
A sale is not something you pursue; it's what happens to you while you are immersed in serving your customer. Unknown
Niall sounds so cute.
I like that someone updated the copyright in 2010
The coffee from the cafe in Cobb was especially good today, but it did not help me much on my Persian exam.
Whoa what's everyone doing for new years? A year ago today I had the balls to start a better life in a better place with nothing. Lv life!
Wow. Police are so kind and considerate when media and #unm faculty are present
we love the way you look from across the street... Come to tbar!!!
a cigar smoking, whiskey drinking man at the pool staring suspiciously. Please tell me he was wearing boxers & wifebeater.
Note to the world: ferociously banging on your keyboard does not in fact get your notes in the computer faster, its just obnoxious.
He's just a mama's boy 😔
Haha, yeah. That's a good episode- hadn't seen that one before!
This sucks!!!
thanks for follow and YOU have a nice day too
Never tell a girl to calm down. It just makes her more angry
ewwww I took AP world History. that exam sucks.
may I please have a follow back??? (:
Don't forget about Colleen, she's also not on facebook, but she is sharing her crazy thoughts on twitter now
Comm Fish thanks staff, PSC commissioners and community participants. "Amazing level of civic engagement."
Yep....i was ready for bed. Then I saw a picture of people making food.. What did I do? Get up and make a feast at 2 in the morning!
Hey everyone! Go check out 's tour announcement at Facebook.com/actionitem :)
oh, the #heat made the playoffs? I hadn't noticed
You did Sam...before you found love -_-
Seattle, here I come.
Wish I was there with you girls. I know you're having fun! -- chapmansharp (). Wish you were here too!
Alright. Thanks.
Tomorrow should be a good day! And then a three day weekend!!
absolutely! Unbelieveable. Things are coming together.
I am NOT answering that!
#IAmThankful to everyone who has contributed to my success this year...and to everyone who will contribute in the the future. Luv Ya!
Heath Bell is killing me
I need a girl in my life so I can have someone to spend this money lol and find love
Do you use a profile or fan page on #Facebook?
I spent the flight back from DC taking notes on my notes. Now I just need to take notes on THOSE notes.
Okay an I still don't care. I didn't say it was cute.
I'll do it, I have to do laundry and finish a puzzle but I'm good at describing things, can I phone it in? voicemail?
We go threw hell to get to paradise
didnt read ur self-serving story Are you that despicable and judgemental a person as to criticize w/o knowing motive?
Making "Bacon" in Real Estate - helping people sell their home and having more fun with folks who want to buy a house. Can we help you?
#iabaudio Taylor wood talking tap to call
The more followers I get the more I'll tweet!
Hellomynameischristianbeadles is now my instagram. Follow me or pay the consequences.
Tweeting from 100th anniversary camporee. Almost 1,000 girls and families at Camp Dellwood to celebrate!
Shows focus! RT : Yes, there are annual membership dues, and you must be referred by 2 existing members
loved seeing George back and so happy that Chris pulled the come from behind victory and William is finally gone!
Srsly. Or if we're going to go there, do we have to talk about tax exempt status, and everything else?
Jeff Teague almost yoked that
Trying to figure out where to set-up my light box to take photos for Etsy listings. The natural window light has changed with the seasons!
thanks, right back at you! let us know if you need biz cards, postcards, etc., and we'll hook you up w/ a great price.
This is National Prosthodontics Awareness Week. WIthout us, there'd be no dentures, bridges, & lots of missing front teeth! We <3 patients!
Yoooooooo what's good!
oh my God that was crazy
love you !
Uh its an iphone
bo packing is no fun! but totally worth it for mexico.
The person who reads my tweets through his phone, I needed YOU yesterday.
Mixx Friday & Saturday. Book your party in advance!
Thanks For 777 Followers!
“Our greatest fear should not be of failure but of succeeding at things in life that don't really matter.” - Francis Chan
I'm 4'11, does that qualify me for the job????
Get "Heaven" today on itunes!
:) Thanks for the follow! It's my dogs' & cats' world...I just live in it.
It's starting to look more like 3pm. I'm running a little behind today!
no spoilers plz :)
Love that my former anchor is making friends with my current anchors
Yo..Feel Like Freestylin But Got No Beat On Hand? Then Get This App Called-"Gimme A Beat"
First Tweet from my iPad. A wonderful birthday present from my very understanding wife. So far, so cool.
i try to be there for ppl as much as i can. i feel like im so nice to everybody.
thanks! And it's been about 2 months now =]
vulture is awesome.
-__- I think its awkward on break with supervisors. Haha
Although I did see Rolling Thunder being escorted by Hwy Patrolmen..Pretty cool.
If the cop that shot John T. Williams in Seattle is prosecuted it will be the 1st time in 30 years an on duty cop has been tried. Too long.
Clousers jet landing soon. Should be a solid weekend hanging with the Penn ave peeps from trumansburg.
Taking #UndergroundFilm and #Animation to the next level! #Filmfests roll with me. Let's do it big Yo!
I wanna rub one out with ;)
next time😘
#RVA #Pollen capital of VA? I think so!
Oh, sí, April 13, 7pm, Brava Theater. coming to the Mission. Taco USA. Book reading & signing.
New Girl Talk is out!!! Free as usual
No it doesn't numb skull it shows that a computer drafted a check.... you really are stupid..
I hate it when men whistle at me like I'm a lost little puppy. When women do it, it makes me fearful of my womanhole.
To the window to the wall till the sweat go's down my balls
Nobody reads my fucking bio. Stop mentioning me when you follow me. Fuck damn shit. My interactions show me.
No, I always regard going to ALA as akin to the tumbrel ride to the guillotine. I'll be there Sunday... Meetup?
That was really beautiful!! Thanks for sharing. :)
Good reminder for me/ : If we love one another, we truly listen. If we don't, we think of things we want to say -
Riding the digital waves bro!
we are happy to be 1 of the 500 :-)
RT : Nervous as hell
Just saw "The Doctor's Wife" and now I wanna see a book series about The Corsair. Get to work.
Roof closed at Miller Park. Hot like Arizona, which is winning by a lot, BTW
Undertaker is Back!!! Taker--H 3
great to have you in tonight! Stop by tomorrow for night!
good grief
i vote for nap.
You forgot to add, "to bring into work and share with the crew."
Going to KISS show tonight in Va. Will rock as always. www.kevinkash.com
I'm doing well. How are you doing? How is your jewelry business?
That won't help. All of Wisconsin is currently unavailable.
where'd you park?! That's too much money lol
My neighbor put up a "Honk for Vickie's (my Mom) B-Day" sign up in our yard. All day cars have been laying on their horns as they drive by.
4 HR's at Camden Yards not as impressive as Ryan Braun's 3 bombs and a double at Petco
" You said you'd always be there for me, but you're not. And it's because of me. It's my fault. –Simba
im puking up captitalism cause it's being shoved down my throat, everyone else seems to have no gag reflex tho
The top may wobble at times, but faith keeps it spinning.
excellent! Thank you! That's what I was hoping to do. She's coming on on
spotted cockroach number 3... Turns out your spray doesn't work on this one
You tell yourself you don't like them, and yet every time you think of them, your heart beats faster.
from - make open courseware extensible.
Haha wait until u start skyping
Hello! Are you home yet? Lol
Oh it's such a nice day, and I'm stuck inside doing computer work! Goober.
Ok goodnight to everyone! Bye :*
RT : Great ManDate with
Yes I am :-), don't tell ! That's how I keep up with things on the other side of the pond.
Best birthweek ever so far! Finger tattoos, dinner with family, new motorcycle helmet! And it gets better, tomorrow spa day and clean house!
Good Morning Dylan!!! :) <3
Warm weather makes me wanna ride my motorcycle :'(
Thx and I will! Congrats on your success :)
application to National Taiwan U's anthro program sent! u be a fool if you dont accept me honeybooboochild!
you can try Fiesta- they usually have a few for sale
Happy Birthday to one of my favorite former students Have a blessed day!
Wanted to get fucked up tonight since I'm so upset about my ex. But guess that won't happen.
in business and in sports speed kills, I am not just talking about being fast. talking about speed of efficency, though and focus action
Oh shit. Someone farted. If I die...you know why.
Today I'm feeling I A-flat minor. Where's the coffee?
We miss you guys!
Everyone check out tonight at 6pm CST, 7 for us east coasters. I love the idea and think it's great that they're doing it.
Thank you! Good to see you too! How've you been?
so, the day we release our first issue, our host decides to shut down. moving the site over to a different host. should be back up soon!
just to me lol
Taj gibson just peeled his muffin cap back blue
Maybe. Your odds are currently 1 in 3,011.
My thoughts exactly!
have you tried the shrimp toast at son of a gun in LA?
Thank YOU. You know how we love your cookie voice.
If I had a nickel for each time BOTH Tony and Mike were in Studio, I would live in a cardboard box.
I'm tempted to make a subliminal tweet
I like Bon Jovi! A lot!
RT : What Site Owners, Web Developers, And SEOs Should Know About the Yahoo/Microsoft. bit.ly/5yrEg
Finish this question: The one person I would love to meet is __________
Happy Anniversary!
Visit us the fastest growing classified site in the world to market or sell almost anything. Isisclassifieds.com
My mom totally cock blocked me in my dream last night.
The minuteman are an Nit power house now. Loving it!
Behind your tweets lies the hatred and disrespect of a fanatic. Not my thing. I wish you luck.
Happy Birthday, Fenway Park!
Yaaaaay-uh (easy to say, hard to write). Trying hard to focus on work, yet find myself shopping a bit this afternoon.
People change, feelings fade, heart broken, friends leave, friends become enemies, lovers become strangers, you’ll be judged, life goes on.
Want to go #solar? We can help with all your residential, off-grid, water heating, water pumping & gate operating solar needs!
The computer is down, therefore no broadcast
Internet Marketing Agency, Command Partners, Expands Again
#PeopleWhoWereBulliedButNowSuccessful , , , , . They inspire me a lot. ♥
Arg! Yesterday was 404 and I missed my opportunity to post a status code joke.
Lml, Such A Funny Brother.
She be on twitter all day, how she ain't got more tweets then me
This jello tastes like cough syrup ..
Might be able to get someone to come pick them up today if not.
Walmart = fat people in track suit day! I need to start shopping at Target
wow...how very weak..
Cheese Steak! Cheese Steak! Cheese Steak! Are you ready for the Texas Cheese Steak from Memphis Minnie's?
What's up tonight #Akron?
funny! she doesn't find it so funny. I say its not funny. (but it is.) I'm a good girlfriend, and embarrass her via twitter.
I'm trying to almost give away a Honda Car,here in Phoenix and no one is calling.I guess every body has a car to get around in.That's Good
"The key to immortally is living a life worth remembering" - Brandon Bruce Lee
most boring saturday night ever! i hate when my weekend plans dont go as planned shit pisses me off
"You can't intimidate the " - Charles Barkley... "You sure can't" -
RT : Oh. It's green week! Maybe Dwight was conserving his energy?
Searching for a Domain host for my #startup - Any suggestions of a reputable hotsting compant?
No but he was on some super homophobic tip the other day and he got retweeted on my TL. Maybe looking for attention.
Welcme to the home of self-defense products!
Well how about that... I'm being followed by Vegas Strippers ().
♪How Am I Supposed To Leave You When My Heart Tells Me To Keep You? How Can You Ask Me To Let You Go?♪ ~
Why would u pass on Earl Thomas philly? Good pick but bad time.
Just opened 4 btls of bubbly+wondered abt moon phase. Corks were MONSTERS to get out! RT : "...Full moon in perigee yesterday"
Wondering what I might come back to after 10 days of being away from work.
A whole bunch of misunderstandings and assumptions psssshh #humans lol
Give Me Love. Xx
Took another leap of faith :) love it
oh my gosh, I can't wait till they're over! 3.5 days of sleep sounds amazing!
All I have to worry about is my Spanish final and then I am DONE.
I'd like to see Johnny Damon come to Cleveland. Actually, let's just cut Sizemore now and keep Damon.
Battery on your remote control running low? Press the buttons harder.
Kate Stanford of Google talking SoLoMo with great examples... Mercedes Key to Viano interactive campaign via key chain very cool.
i was in school! i miss u 2<3
the hits? I just saw that some other people I follow arrived in NYC today.
Can't wait to see some of the new #website designs you've created! Thanks for sharing your #skills!
Traffic. Traffic. Traffic. Traffic. Traffic.
Thank you for my gorgeous bracelet, i LOVE!! Definitely brightened up my day!
I seen that the other day, but lord about to burn the house down lol.
Me too! Specifically, the University Archivist for my alma mater [huge state school]. The position's been vacant for years.
Haha there is nothin on tv
As far as I can tell she doesn't seem to like ANY pasta. There must have been a mixup at the hospital.
call in my girl! :(
stupid 19 yr old boy who laugh thinks is cute but ruined her halloween by gettin married
we've been together for thousands of years..
Anecdote from 1 Seattle restaurant Groupon: 2k sold, 40% used in first 60 days, big Fri/Sat crowds. Basically, filled unused inventory
Pierce: Limitations in R5.4 against fee splitting are an impediment to delivery of legal services
Not a problem, it's what we're here for. ;-)
poorly run business for sure. Poor Sanchez doesn't deserve this.
Omfg he really just broke my glasses and then say sorry No.!
jus sayin'. if u gon get all deep and meta on my ass i'm gon point out how stupid it is. fuck yo couch
Where the fuck has alex riley been?
only if i was tan
enjoying life with 2 kids. You?
Jay-Ism # 4 - "A n Individual succeeds by always achieving, not by always repeating"..(Keep pushing yourself to new limits to find success)
Are you celebrating a March Birthday? If so stop by the Front Desk for a Yummy Surprise!
My mom said if I get my grades up, she'll take me to Demi's concert this summer. That's such hard work tho.
exactly. Could he have sustained those injuries from someone else or even inflicted them thereafter? Yes.
wen he first came out his name was meek mills
That's really funny. I reviewed her portfolio and wondered if she was related to you. Totally did not put that together.
so it looks like ORETO the fifth spec written by yours truly RS1 is resurfacing, making a comeback if you will. The Poet of Rhyme & Treason.
Interface is bringing Powershell (Feb 7) and Project Management (Mar 14) classes to Flagstaff, AZ - register today if you're in northern AZ!
Thank you Nate!
Overcoming poverty is not a task of charity, it is an act of justice. Like slavery and apartheid, poverty is not natural. It is man-made...
where are you from? i´m spanish!
Of all the songs about being dumped by Judy Collins, "Suite: Judy Blue Eyes" is really the best.
Treating myself to guava, pina colada, mango and strawberry coconut cupcakes and cake pops for my birthday courtesy of :)
i don't like sewing jeans. specially cause they're not even mine. Like wtf pay me bitch
Couples Entry TWO FOR ONE! Single? Print the bulletin pass!
I know how you feel, noone at my school listens to my music.
This #RARE album is unbelievable ..
RT : Nothing surprises me anymore!!
Just spent the last minute reading Nonsense to my niece. Very cute book!!
I keep having uncomfortable moments with women at work, they flirt a little too aggressively, and im married...
My allergies are getting worse...I have a bloody nose, and a headache.
... Lebron isn't even the best player on his own team lmao.
You won't be seventeen forever, we can get away with this tonight. <3
that's our inspiration for lyrics.
#10tweetsaday its like exercise for your social networking....
seems like everyone who has a firm or a company has some guilt and secrets.
Why thank you!
is this really happening? I swear Ill never be happy again. And dont you dare say we can just be friends.
What fun madness! Thank you to all who came out to World Voices, ESPECIALLY the 150+ volunteers! PEN office is mighty quiet today...
And... D Rose is done for the season!
You can lead a boy to college but you can't make him think
you never get over it, you just get to the point where it doesn't matter so much anymore.
The ice cream truck playing the music of scary clowns outside my window is messing with my ability to compose
Just left Tucson on a roll to Austin Texas for South by Southwest
You're crazy! HaHa I'll text you, "It's Britney Bitch!"
aye so i guess my birthday weekend begins now((:
my phone died.
The highest reward for your dedication to excellence is not what you get from it but what you become from it
hope yoiur having an amazing weekend!
UW is def one of the most social savvy schools. That said, it's mostly just marketing. Next step: genuine conversation.
I'm now a nail tech:) love doing my own nails fabulously!!!! <3
i'll admit the yabbadabbabitch part was pretty funny.. even tho he wasn't there :x
The short stubby guy tryed to put Jim Jones out there Monday. But got handled he was terrified.LMAO
Can't keep up wit all this new social networking stuff...
hahaha i love it, gotta catch up soon
R.I.P. Joe Morello
nap time.. long day😔💤
#FF more superb, less absurd.
big nick for sure. Flippin titties all day
how can you see into my eyes like open doors? save me from the nothing ive become. bring me to life
The best thing you can do in 2 min for your business? Check out the "One Idea Two Minutes" podcast on our website or iTunes
thanks guys!
So you know that if you are so complimentary I MUST reply. Awesome, me? Gracias, mi amor.
funny thing about niggas , you never run out of em lol smh
Beards before hoes. Or did I get that saying wrong?
Those that want respect, give respect.
a week and a half away from being able to vote..
Gas station attendant pointed at a zit on my face and said "proactive worked for her". I said "oh really.. College really worked for me"
Me and mah boyfriend are doing great. :D & so is Valerie and Menchaca. <3 Coleita loves Menchacalita.
oh yes. Preparing my liver now.
How many times can I break till I shatter?
$20 for the whole lot of them. Do it, do it!
Thanks, Andy! Glad we could connect in the workshop today. We'll be in touch soon!
Why is ain't tweeting much?
Have a new pair of specs from Metro Eye? Or a fave pair you can't live without? Tweet a pic and show us how you rock your frames!
my net is down at da moment but im free saturday tho,if u gonna be n da studio-i could come thru
RT : “Quality has to be caused, not controlled.”- P. Crosby [Amen.]
should have a new edit of my reel ready reel soon, hope i reelly love it when im done
It is WAY too hot. Ugh.
tacos or burritos?
I'll make sure not to walk in your room. I find displays like that highly discriminatory to those of us with mutant height! ;-)
please follow back:)
you do ya school work
Did anyone else notice that dude in the 'Boyfriend' video wearing a 'Chunky Bieber' sweater? LOL.
Hanging out with weather producer this morning in the Center. Talking about watching today's Manchester Derby.
It's been a busy week. Finally getting back to painting tonight. We'll see if the decisions I've been thinking about hold their weight.
#Weather Bluefield, West Virginia Weather :: 63F MOSTLY CLOUDY
Just left one church and about to head to another one!
thank you for the follow! Love your site! Keep in touch
You, my friend, are lucky.
I would go to see Dali's home in Spain!
Learn about the A. Philip Randolph Porter Museum on today at Noon
No matter what the weather no matter what the weather RT : My friends, are your friends. We can be friends together.
you are amazing. You completely changed the course of their lives.
Playing with Poll Everywhere
Your welcome! And your in the Yay like us! And a night owl like us! lol
I'm with Maddie..talking about your brother lololol
": is going to die of how many times she does hookah." LMFAO , I'm not smoking.
Man im hungry as fuck!!!!!
Nice to hear about another good dining option before heading to a movie, Berkeley Rep or Cal event. Thanks!
well hung.
Getting ready for the tomorrow! Can't wait, going to have to save lots of room for all that food!
#FF for the best tech reporter north of the border:
i am deffinitly a real person,not a spamer,and trying to retire from driving gasoline tanker in the greater phily pa. area
of course :)
Great evening block walking, then meeting friends and supporters at the Metrocrest Democrats meeting. 22 days to go!
eat a piroshki for me...
Good morning, !
probably my favorite April fool's this year!
I spent today looking at my marketing plan. What do you do on a daily basis to market your business?
I like Skip Schumaker at second base for the #STLCards much more than Tyler Greene and Daniel Descalso.
Love that place!! “: Dine out. Fight AIDS! Headed to El Nuevo Rodeo now! #dolmn #FB”
um...where is my invite
Watching Arthur on pbs kicking it old school :)
Success means different things 4 different people...but is a mutual goal 4 us all. Value the path that leads u there, winding roads & all!
He'll be home and done with the military in 1 wk!
sure, you bet, no problem... Now... About that acquisition of my work...
; have i told u i love u lately??;)
The Girl with the Bacon Tattoo
Why, yes, I am eating Nutella between sets of sit-ups.
Any museum/exhibition folk know an out-of-box tool for recording video of visitors answering a question? Have seen one, now can't find it
Oh darn....we wouldn't want that happening now would we?!
Locbit wants to wish everyone a early happy
WOOT RT : Here's an idea: to road trip in VIP party bus/limos.
Big sports news re Dem cheatin' Saints. More with Packman on sports at 6:45!
I don't understand how I'm still so tired. Cannot deal. Cup of coffee #2, maybe skipping yoga.
interrupting yourself while talking to yourself… Quite the paradox, eh?
I have alerted the IT boys to your situation. Have you posted your prob to the chat board on the site?
RT dont forget about our delivery service Fast Food Express ATL. check us out.
Kids are hogging the iPad, can't keep up with twitter feed, feels like I'm missing half the game
Tillman got another force fumble!
EW I DONT WANT HER LICKING ME
NEVER. I will die with my phone and have it buried next to me in it's own little coffin.
voice* QUICK TIME
I'm right here!
Omw to school bumping that
Is this love?
"afraid to get nair in your shampoo again?" wow hahahahahahaha
Always getting the urge to dance salsa when there's no one around to dance with.
Glad to have the Founder of the Northwest Chapter of Keiretsu Forum on the advisory board! Thanks Todd!
Welcome to the machine
Sounds like the perfect Sunday to us! Did you have fun?
I am looking forward to the release of the Rock Dog Revolution cd!
hey, you wanna partake in ?? we're looking for tap dancers!
Dr. Hrabowski, the president of UMBC.
partying and working same old 😃
Definitely want to visit it one more time before leaving MN!
Feeling some better. Not quite 100% yet, but I'll see you tomorrow. Glad you & Shata had the movie tix to good use!
you should visit his house in Prague…if you lived in that closet you could write like him too!
During the All-Star game when Kane turned into "SuperKane"!! Dominating the breakaway challenge.
Tonight #Infected <3
Q. Why don't Canadians have group sex? A. Too many thank-you letters to write afterwards.
Thanks Sarah! Nice to meet you in Ottawa | RT : Great presentation - welcome to Canada eh!
I literally just want to runaway and never come back.
Too lazy to get up. Fml
He was a television entrepreneur in Boston in the 1930s--we have one of his TVs
at long beach laying down on a sofa with a laptop....end of story
#20ThingsAboutMe 15) I think Dale Jr . is sexy(:
ID eat it... I would make the best oral sex to ur body~ muah #Besos 69
“The trouble with not having a goal is that you can spend your life running up and down the field and never score.” -- Bill Copeland
Lincoln HID can be considered as the brightest idea for making driving more comfortable
Ha! when the video comes out your break is O-V-E-R OVER!
But pops will be here in the morn so bout to call it a nite
o u better smash dat
Macho is at moms tonight. She prob cooked for him and he is asleep in a huge bed while I'm the one having separation anxiety.
We told this little girl that we named the dog at Petland Yolo. Oh my God lmfao.
she sucks bro
First 500 attendees each day will receive "Goodie Bags" full of coupons, give a ways, IPODs and more. Visit www.thehomeandgardenmarket.com
Go get 'em this week at The Masters!
I've come to the conclusion that listening to a book is much more interesting than reading it. Plus it's much faster!
so he got mad? .. dude he's overprotective !!! :/
Fckk Muve Music for not having Sweet Love on there
noo lexii . Im not idc about that situation . I dont even know tbh . If im ugly them im ugly . Or nasty
Yeah, it definitely is lol
In order to be the best, you have to know your breaking point - go to the edge of it, but never go beyond. ~ Rebecca Twig
Going up to Attica.
NYE is finally here!
u totally forgot about me :((
Nice! RT : Finished a wet & windy 5k race this morning in 29min flat. The charity run is a great addition to #coopthink this year!
RT : Pixel-topia! This video from Washington Project for the Arts Experimental Media Series is amazing.
Earn your career in nursing, psychology or science/math and live within your own agendas by enrolling in online college programs
I thoroughly enjoyed that.
i'm a work in progress ;)
when people constantly divert their attention elsewhere government continues to do what they're doing, like they have for ages
goodnight oh everybody go follow this beautiful girl
eats blue waffles on the daily with a side crusty lips. Secretions
Tweet tweet, let it begin! Tweet tweet, let it begin! Tweet tweet, let it begin! Tweet tweet, let it begin! Tweet tweet, let it begin! MENGS
i will follow him for his birthday if u follow me for my birthday (july 24!)
excited for lunch tomorrow!
said that id rather "mute" you than unfollow so you can keep ya follow.... lol she's right though...
cough it should be me cough cough lol wut? :D
is it really that much better tho.
I hear you guys got a ton of it!
DanceBlue was definitely a success.
He don't know what he talking about.
NEW MEXICO TOMORROW WITH , , an my girl !
Thank you for screening MY AMERICA at the meeting tonight!
Why thank you! It's the least we can do. :) Also - it's been too long! RT : I love a employment ad with a sense of humor!...
thx, we never made it, but will also plan earlier for next yr.
sent u a dm hopefully. New cell is acting weird.
Save yourself!
RT : having trouble synching my bank account for kickstarter amazon payment system, any recommendations | Kick for starters
Hopefully I get my tragus piercing tomorrow 😊
RT : Kudos to & , which just scored a cache of well-deserved
Still devastated about Faried, man.
Backstage Romance is rad. Go like them on facebook!
This week is going so slow!
I don't post, I don't email, I don't correspond in any way. I just report them to the hosting company.
It's coo tho. I could careless what anyone says about me.
They were adorable
I am in desperate need of inspiration.
what does this mean Donna?Visit this free promotion site on my profile if you need more follows..hey follow4follow? will trade
Current computer skills are key: starting with Word, Excel and PowerPoint.
Join us tonight as DJ plays all the songs you like but can never remember the name of. Stay tuned for the
May Adam's service to the world be an influence and example to us all.
Rock n roll again in Berkeley!
Match day!
cool we'll when I'm chatting wit you off here
You got it!
Very excited at what the future will bring! Door is wide open for bigger and better things!!! You never know what is around the corner :-)
I'm beginning to feel like an expectant father. No really, I am very excited about how things are coming along with Ebuxing.com
No Sir, I want a Muppet government!! "Do you think the solution to Kony is the US invading Uganda, setting up a puppet govt"
lol already did it my gurl
Imagine how good McCoy would be right now if he was named starter 4 games ago.
u mean u had a convo with on what you like to tweet? *confused
Posting pics on fb Bs tats be weak af... & ppl be liking them
STEELERS BABY WHAAATTT!!!!!!!!
Yes, it was discussed that curiosity of this newfangled code thingy has a lot to do with it.
I am but i wanted to see if you would bring me something but never mind i guess I'm not important enough too you LOL :)
Don't starve to lose weight! You won't get enough nutrients and your body slows its metabolism to hold onto precious calories.
There will be no landscape photography in #Loudoun today. Water falls from the sky and the wind blows from the south. Maybe another day...
How many seasons are there? Hah. I've seen quite a bit of episodes, but I haven't seen the show in forever.
Who got the Studio on deck?? Get @ me!! I got sum ish on my mind..
Trick or treat, trick or treat, give me something good to eat
hahahahahahahaha whose pitching for us??????
#WhenWillYou just be a real person
Wisconsin and Marquette both play Thursday. Looks like I'll be watching basketball all day. I mean, I was going to anyway, but still...
very nice song!
Relationship > Distance
How is my CCW training different? I don't just teach what you need to get a concealed license, I teach what you need to know to stay alive!
As Mayor, please loosen the liquor laws.
Graduating senior looking to learn about the craft of PR.
You know it's a bad lunch day when you are excited that you packed a cheese stick.
#dhtrial if nic rejected offer with an 8 to 4 jury lock she is a blonde of steel. Gotta give her credit. Possibility of a retrial is real.
Happy Thanksgiving everyone!! We're thankful for you. :)
bastards didn't even buy me a martini! Pfffffffft
thanks. Will do!
were gonna handle;) ill hit you up tomorrow kk
No clue! I'm hoping they do! * <-- a snowflake
I'm geeking out so much over Pottermore. I'm a Ravenclaw!
More like John Lacking!
Love you.
. Thanks! I uploaded the Hidden Picture Books just to see how it would work on my
stop tweeting every 20s about ur elbow punk;)
76ers won now it's #flyers turners go boys
I'm listening to a little Drake myself :)
I take it all back.
thanks, Larry. Hope you made it home safely.
Proof that TK is a closet NOW fan
I know what you're saying lol I really don't have too much of a problem with most of the modern music
#AintNothingLike hugging someone you care about, and they squeeze you harder and longer.
I hope it's just all in our heads ;). Id like to have a non-acidic stomach again. Good luck! We can cheer each other on!
After chatting with Rebecca of last night, and today's news, I have realised that is basically *everywhere* ;-)
lol, does it make you better?
Thanks Erin!! RT : #nowplaying "Sleep On This" by Such a great song!
pork fries and clam chowder! Yum!
Seis De Mayo is special to me too. Let's go get tanked on Jose Cuervo and salsa.
Definitely get the book! You may never be the same...
Pilot killed in Lexington plane crash was on his way to furniture market
ha! "Hold out hope you should not, tired your arms shall be"...lol
Brady: Urban renewal should NOT be an economic development tool
I'll mention to the chef on your behalf. ;) RT : This weather demands the return of the watermelon pizza!
Reverb = Modesty..Auto Tune =Dishonesty..Please stop lying to me through your microphone. <3 bri
Congratulations to joining the great Copyblogger gang - wonderful news!
He still has it because he's admin on my HCRFS FB Page still!
To love abundantly is to live abundantly, and to love forever is to live forever
you guys kick some serious ass, just FYI
Dumb bitch in the car in front me holding up traffic, oblivious to the world ...
Come pick me up in the a.m?
i'm almost there. so close to those auditions. there almost here. there almost here
it's time to count sheep! Lol I'm out...
Bridal Shower time :*
guys who talk to you first
Too much shit to do today, but gotta get shit straight with
watching E3 with jen.
your customer service dept is the BEST, Thank you.
Finally finished this paper and powerpoint!
Hey ! Any fun lighting tips for our followers to make their house feel fresh for spring?
Listening to
you should make my sister's Christmas wish come true and follow her please
Thanks. Recommend send your story if you havent done so. He blogs vegan testimonials. They are inspiring and awesome to read
so what time?
my random question for you.. what is your favorite book??
Where's our next great baker?!
Amazon should really build tunnels underneath all of their buildings. Driving in SLU during lunch time is a disaster!
Nd now making so many others dream come true i hope u had an amazing birthday!! Pls follow me tht would make this a reality
Remember the new OT rules. If we get there of course.
we have them anyways...
Ate here yesterday, now just meeting a friend. Still, deeply contemplating a plate of mahi tacos. (@ Sharky's Mexican Grill - Cahuenga)
a guess what
Thanks, glad you enjoyed it!
#BieberGivesTheBestBlowjobs <<<<<<<THIS rofl
SUP SUP JEFF ENG!
I got new iPhone, it is cool.
S/O to the girls who are half naked in their twitcon!
A wise german man once said: "Life isn't all about happiness."
Thought for the Day "My list of ingredients for success is divided into four basic groups: Inward, Outward, Upward and Onward." David Thomas
In a dining room- draw focus on the table with a chandelier or pendant. Use indirect lights, such as sconces, for dim corners.
we could have had a #SF road trip, especially since I've NEVER been there! Worst.Californian.Ever.
Going to the dells for mother's day with mom. I hate pools but I need to get away for a while :(
It hurts :(
Lucky I wanted too see it! :(
garbage in, garbage out
My headache is really really bad! its at the point I feel like crawling up in a ball on the floor or banging my head against a wall :(
I for one, support striking employees of Paris' Crazy Horse.
Thanks for the RTs and listings!
sweet :) RT : Yep.. I used to do that back then.. in the "old" days.. hahaha
you ain't lying. Lol Michigan has no summers nor beaches! :-0
IL #families to get extra support due to $19m in grants for home-visiting programs. Read bit.ly/pfFJ7e
Follow bACK (:
"I think we should just be friends" is the worst thing to say to your own kid.
Well Spring may TECHNICALLY be a week away, but it appears to have rolled on to The Avenue a little early, come get a burger and a drink!
When I sing in the shower, I sound really good. Then I turn the water off....
Hi Rev. Jeff, I hadn't seen that thank you!
Wish I could! Heading to MN at noon. Missed you last night, !
Very True!
Pour some (shampoo) out for
Holy cow! 5000 kindle downloads at the Seattle Public Library in the past week.
precise wants to call into your radio show please tweet me your request line number thank you.
WHERES THE PARTY #MAY27th??? ---->>>>>>>>> ITS AT THE #AYVAcenter.... for yall women that love to #twerk .
Oh, I'm changing my name to Charity Monday. I needed to add a little white trash to my life. I'll expect my check Tuesday.
“: Trying to talk out of a Tinkerbell tattoo” Bahahagahaha yes please do 😄
Thanks so much, Noah. Same to you♥ I hope your day is going beautifully:)
To say the Badger hoops team's play this season has been wildly inconsistent would be understatement of the year. HUGE road win today boys!
O never thought about having no-longer-living fake aunts. Huh. *contemplative* I need to see more Ava Gardner movies!
Reflecting on Tiller's memorial service in D.C. today -- we need to share our outrage.
I want a new droid
people get excited about overhead storage space.
What you are witnessing is the power of the noise of Lakers Nation.
Hi tweeps, been hiding out for a while...I'm back
Somehow I have a Google+ account, and all the people it recommends for me are the ones who have sent me misaddressed email over the years.
We applaud efforts to help #Foster_Parents protect their families from risk. Berry Family Child Care Network
My 3 year old grandson has been sticking to me like glue for the last week. I love the little tiger, but I need some space.. Yelling now.
Special thanks to the true indie brand supporters out there that do blog & spread the word
is visiting us this week! Beware of #DC weather, you never know if you need a winter coat or flip flops!
Saturday or Sunday!
it sure isn't
back to work after 2 weeks off - 1600+ items in my Inbox (rolls up sleeves)
thats no fun
French Laundry is always nice. Bring sacks of cash.
Making all these crafts for my little girl's party is inspiring me to try new things
sorry it's gate C28!
Needa dye my hair like ASAP
Top 5 mega trends after group voting.
Yeah, I hate when punts get blocked, too. RT I hate it when people are deliberately obtuse.
I believe you.
RT : There are a lot of ppl on laptops in here. Do you ever get tempted to stand up and yell #NANOWRIMO in a crowded coffee shop?
Smoking after getting a tooth extraction causes air pocketts that are very painfull. WHY DID I SMOKE
We're happy to support!
Customer Appreciation day tomorrow at 7-Eleven! Starts at 10:00 am. Raffle prizes include:Bike,Monster Car,Juke Box & more!
Not that you care, but I'm about to take IE9 out for a test drive.
Ratatat, writing and studying the history of rock and roll. I'd say this makes for a pretty good night, though its going to be a late one.
I thought 'I am morman' ads were dumb -- just saw a "1 in 4 is aethiest find out why" ad. Now im confused as to which i find more idiotic
#gcyale : Social practices (e.g. Anon) are forming worldwide that resist abuse of these terms to overcome free expression
So glad to hear you enjoyed my book. I really appreciate you spreading the word about.
Parking issues in HTX? Never! “: #bisnow Seeing office tenants putting more people in less space, resulting in parking issues.”
Support your local musicians!
Oh a little bit of everything. Life good for you?
I think this is a fabulous idea 😁
your fans love 2 watch & listen 2 u everyday, JW do u ever have what your fans call a Reba day where u watch & listen 2 ur own stuff
Jacob... I move back in 20 days
New PayPal will consolidate all yur credit,debit,& gift cards,& recognize coupons.Physical cards & coupons are becoming a thing of the past.
FOLLOW US AND WE FOLLOWING BACK!!!! NOT JUST A MOVEMENTBUT A LIFESTYLE!!!! MIGHTY MPIYA!!!! RT!!!!! RT!!!!!! RT!!!!!!!!
Any girl would be lucky to have you it would be amazing and be everything I wanted if I had you cause your a one gnarly dude 14
haha best video ever.. I wish my grandma was that cool
Ozzie Guillen press conference live!!!!! Let's go Ozzie!!!!!
If you can't decide on having a panini or a salad for lunch...don't have either. Order a Big Glass of wine. Always works for me....
Yup just hit a walk off home run
Hey, just discovered 8BitSeattle! Thanks to you and to Brett for putting us on the map!
Can't wait to see your #MothersDay tweet. I know its going to be FIRE.
#Education Group and #City Council Group Meetings today at 3:30pm, #Chamblins. #GA at 4pm. Hope you can make it.
is coming and it's not and they hurt like hell
Sixth Suggestion, Pick an evening or rainy Saturday afternoon where you can spend two hours together watching a movie or cuddling together.
loved it
SB 364 Part Deux Kehoe and Senate Pro Tem meet with Yee, the author to determine fate big biz appears more on board
You can have the evidence right in front of you, but if you can't imagine something that has never existed before, it's impossible
At shop!!! Big day.
no, no, no... Another weapon for Aaron Rodgers!! Dd is gettin old,Welker fills the void!!
If the world was drama free..
that's what we're hearing from everybody as well. Which one is your favorite character?
Habby Birthday HAve A GRAND One :D <3
Whew. Rondo looks okay.
I'm in love with Kerry Washington.
Happy Cinco de Mayo!
Headed to bed with my love
Are you thinking of getting another tattoo? Hit "like" if you are.
ah thanks!!
So.. I can mute ppl now lol..†
all the fb people who are posting pics with their moms
We are looking for graphic design help for our Go Red For Women collateral. Want to make a difference? Call Kim: 503-595-2573. Thanks!
Crazy Mary gig TONIGHT 11/11 at Trash Bar 256 Grand st., Brooklyn
That's true. Helps to know where to go.
Arroyo pitching a lot of balls. But due to chain of evidence, they are being called strikes.
We are actually not open on weekends yet, can you make hacknight on wednesday night?
We are looking for "sideshow"/"freakshow" entertainers/groups to perform. Please send them my way! (Please RT!)
in houston?
Fuck society's idea of beauty.! Your beautiful in EVERY SINGLE WAY!<3
We hope our mom had a fun Mother's Day! We wish we were home in Indiana to spend it with her.
What is your Funniest #Poker #Story ok lets here Em.....
what ya rehearsing?
Everything happens for a reason<3
#ff the dude from The Cars
Either you're, single or in a Relationship, there is no in between
Genius RT : mix in some vodka and I bet it would taste like heaven.
Best wishes to friends presenting & performing & interviewing at
RIP Junior Seau - our thoughts are with your family and friends right now. You will be remembered and missed.
we'll be on soon. I know you love Storm Team snow coverage.
woot it's getting close I'll have to post a picture of my outfit so you can see you'll definitely be able to spot me. Lol
Luby's for dinner tonight. Twenty years later and it still kicks a$$!
DWF Offices will be closed today (11/23) through Friday (11/25) for the Thanksgiving holiday, we'll see you back on Monday!
RT : #dogoodsummit = the pursuit of profit + purpose. It CAN be done. It SHOULD be done.
hey Toledo your tweet to your daughter inspired me to send the same to mine. I thought you should know that
however, if anything gets to me along the way, I'll try to sell the tickets and get regular ones.............
“: What did y'all think of Steven Tyler? Thought it was pretty cool.” it was terrible! Were we listening to the same thing?
So much alcohol will be consumed in 9 days. I love my friends.
hmm, should probably tweet something. How about some upcoming iSchool events?
Kendall? She's a senior?! One of my first team kids at AGA! ;)
thank you!
Thank you for your input kind sir, as ignorant as it may be. Have a great weekend!
we miss you Greg!
idk it's pretty hot
I tried so hard and got so far but in the end it doesn't even matter... #Linkin Park
he's a free agent buddy we need him!!!
is their a discount for 2-hour shuttle rides from airport to hotel?
but of course! hope to meet you in real time some day
We're busy getting ready for 's workshop! :)
Re: bball and fball coaches w/ top ten active career win %, what about Ohio St. (Thad Matta and Urban Meyer)?
Good afternoon.twitter first time in a while that i.got some.much needed sleep today should be a good day
Official Celebrity✔ Offical Twitter✔
So if we were to go on tour this year, what cities should we try and hit?
training?!? as in basic?
A1. I don't drink, so I don't really do that... Let's go with L'Chaim. Everyone loves that ch sound.
just no. he's not some musician for 12 year old fangirls
(AP) -- Person familiar with decision: New York Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni has resigned
Kegel, Gesser and Lincoln???? The star studded cast for Cougar Legends presented by Sterling Bank continues to grow!
that's right! U tell 'em, pink panther flakes!!! :-)
Convos outside of SM can help- told some active indiv how valued they are & now they're ambassadors
hit me up if you need a bassist. currently in LA
Children’s early development depends on their parents’ well-being and life skills, particularly interaction and reflection.
": S/o 2 for the follow" back at u hun )
a bit
Good song.
that is brilliant!!! i want more!
Good essay about #Amy Winehouse
DERBY DAY NERVES!
I think i am going to go shower then play some bf3.
also whn ppl say: "when u meet the right one, u will change your mind on having kids" ugh, I have gotten that SEVERAL times...
Watching the
Steakhouse then to sinix for BGCZ
uh huh
Highs in the 70s inland, 70 City, 60s coast today. Sprinkle tomorrow, cooler, highs near 60. Warmest Wed. & Thu... temps in the 70s.
Off to go find a tasty treat in the city of DC;-)
Tony Rishell wants in too. Just moved back to Mi. Already attended an event at Skybar
Do you realize we're going to get married and steal all the social security and be rich while everyone else works till 98 yrs old.
I like.
"When you know yourself you are empowered. When you accept yourself you are invincible." ~ Lifford via Teal Butterflies
I'm pretty lame with updating this Twitter, but I promise I'm better at FYEAHFAREWELLFIGHTER.TUMBLR.COM!!
CNet seems to be down, but DFEOJM says it's up. I can't ping it either.
there is nothing to watch on TV -_-'
I cant wait till your new merch is out soo i can buy it (:
Nigga Ross said 1.5 for the transport. This nigga I swear.. He comes at niggas heads on every track..
at rehearsal. ive been sittin here for almost 2 hours. 1 more hour to go. :/ thats what I get for being in stage crew & not the actual play.
Lakers Are Old News! Time To Get Off The Throne!
Just downloaded the new app. Looking forward to the event next Saturday.
U look like ur havin fun who is the dude with the mustache?? hes all like :D lolz
From Capitol command center: No change on allowing protesters to spend the night tonight, Elise Schaffer says.
CHOO CHOO! Good morning! Wake up! It's #NationalTrainDay, friends. All aboard for
“: YAH I HAD A BABY BUT IM STILL CRAZY!!! - Natalie!!!! #snldigitalshort BRILLIANT!”
Being in school tired af <
Well best of luck in your new venture then! :)
What an awesome fuggin night.
Meeting...meetings....meetings....
Got any good stories from Jingle Jam last night?? We wanna know! Text 69822 or call 222-9800
It is difficult to get a man to understand something when his job depends on not understanding it. Upton Sinclair (1878 - 1968)
Know your place
knockin beats out for you today lol let me know when ur free!
lol i buy any with AP but i always play Ryze xD did you see the sale going on? xD
Also got g here learning some stuff to be next grad assistant 4 the rams...if he doesn't get hired they aren't so "Smart"
Really paying for that lack-luster 1st quarter.
way too young to be getting married IMO
#StayAwayFromMeIf you are not loyal cant have no judice ass people around me
So I was listening to the new ti and lil Wayne and Wayne bets ti in everything
So happy for Modern Family cast, one of my favorites! Steve Carrell definitely should've taken best male lead though!
it will be a platform. Similar to those CMS you mention for adding content. Yet a lot more simpler, and not as robust.
But still, thanks for the press. Those kids are FANTASTIC and deserve more good press like this.
Great info from and today in #JOUR4953 about campaign issues!
Washed Out next week at the black cat. Tickets were $15. :-( I didn't know he was coming. :-( so sad.
Hey everyone! Our tunes are up for listening! W.facebook.com/cowboysnindians give us feedback!
yeah i hate studying for her tests
“ I'll be VERY happy when brings his a$$ back to wrk!! Lol!!”| bahaha I got you covered.
School is already crampin' my social life ⛵
sweet! Thanks for the idea!
are u going to change the DLC playlist on TDM KC DOM u are forcing us to play modes we all don't play? Pls let us know...
Happy Mothers day Mum, thanks for everything...
Why do I throw away so much of what I later need and keep so much of what I don't?
Eli Lilly has a plethora of opportunities ranging from sales to physicians. Stop by their booth to find out more!
Amazing reading the kind words about MCA from every corner of the artistic world.
COULD I GET AT LEAST 50 PEOPLE TO GET FREE NIKE AIR YEEZYS OF YOUR CHOICE BY NEXTWEEK! JUST REFER 25 BUYERS SIGN-UP @
Please! follow my best friend I followed you back! please follow!!
The worst thing someone can do is it pin something and NOT include where it came from or how to make it.
#milwaukee We repriced our retail $ for rock salt!! We are repricing the entire store actually- stay tuned for a BIG CELEBRATION!!! :)
Jet Ski Bash June 23rd Stay Tuned for Details
Thanks a ton lady darling it's actually May 22! Will you be there?!
Y won't this gout go away! This sucks
MISS YOU GUYS!
“: Training is underway at the 2012 Women's JO National Championships in Hampton, VA. Competition begins tomorrow.”
Chilling! Mad bored!
Wow! You look just like your dad!
Go to bed!
If you're jealous of him being/talking with other girls, you know you really care for him...
It's been a great day at the Eiteljorg Museum! Super excited to celebrate at the Contemporary Arts Party!
you should take me out
"Sweet Soul Sister" is an excellent Cult tune.
People are awesome. I'm going to make a YouTube video about how to watch campaign ads before this election.
or if of a lazier demeaner, take a brewery bus tour with us!
In 1860s-70s Republican-controlled state legislatures lifted bans bc believed in equality b4 the law, incl'g Ala., TX, Wash. Terr.
i get love from new york to california
Seattle winter weather thriller, Chapter Two: The Ice Storm.
Tonight ... The moon will shine at its fullest and brightest in this year #Amazing <3
Eric Reda: Artistic Pariah.
I hate myself for loving you.
Thanks for tweeting!
Just ran into my fabulous ex-colleague and friend downtown. What a lovely Friday afternoon treat _that_ was!
I assume you caught Hamilton's HR? Glad you saw him go yard. I have you in for a live hit at 5:20. Feel free to use "go yard".
yessir...cant complain on a 60 degree day in Feb i guess
Did you just congratulate me for reading?
Sure, you got it. And this is only the start. RT Thanks for the Tebow tweets!
thank you, love spending time with the kids! They are having a blast!
Baseball game vs tommorow oh ya ;)
Tyson's punch was wasted on that talentless hack, lol.
Is he actually a homosexual or.
LOL their first 3 (and probably their only 3) games :)
Come on, David.
But I've never been one to kiss and tel #rascal😘
It's fun talking movies with Lil Ninja. He recognized Jeremy Renner in Avengers from Mission Impossible. My mini film geek.
I did trust you. I told you. Everything. That was hard. I never told anyone exactly everything. But I told you..and we did stuff.
how often do you play racquetball with your friend? let us know if you need tips or advice.
Happy memorial day!
Friday is my 14th birthday!!!!!!!!! I can't freakin' wait!!!!
Hello ulcer my old friend . ... =(
you still in Chicago?
Yeah rehearsal went great. I'm excited to get to filming
i remember u too lol :)
I took a nap! It was heavenly and something I haven't done in a very long time. How about you???
Lovingg the New Song Moves Like Jagger By !! I can't get it out of my head:)
Listening to freshmen and sophomores evaluate the year and our use of technology. Very interesting!
RT : God's first language is Silence. Everything else is a translation. -Thomas Keating
has the best swag.
it was great! Thanks for askin :)
working tonight dont feel like it!
I moved into a group house in college; one of my housemates was pretty cute; 6 years later I call that same cute boy "fiancé"
caught up in the madness I see
RT pop up shop was crazy... good time chillin with and mike tony from design
taking notes on presenters slides with PDF Creator on TabletPC while participating on iMac
Boy u look like u in pain on dat Avi lol
The 70's looks like a great time. I would have been a disco queen
I do!
stop smoking cigarettes! You're too beautiful for that shit yosh
Well I guess Finley has scored 3 now, but the question still stands, haha.
MY NAMES TYSON!! but im a girl
Thanks man, we actually are gonna edit together a little video medley after Summerfest. And yeah, we're PUMPED to play with them
haha its ok sweetie!! [: i didnt find it stalkerish ♥
You sure do know how to make me mad .
Thanks Erik, I will tell Tiger you say hello.
Happy Valentines day!! Who has special plans?
I know oomf is doing damage control right now lol
WHY DO PEOPLE ASK ME OUT ON FACEBOOK?
The guys sitting next to me at the bar are having an earlobe-stretching contest...???
damn that's my birthday bro! Lol I don't think I can man thanks though
happy st. patrick's day.
I have no idea what Henrik was thinking about with that last goal...
Great to meet you last night Stephanie.
I have a feeling that is going to be the inspiration for my thesis project next semester. Kind of excited about it, tbh!
Ugh, its like I'm in labor all over again but I'm not even pregnant!
RT : Q2: What do u wish u had known b4 that u know now about running a biz while raising a family? (pls rt)
packers > homework
Welcome to ICTC!! :)
Best combo ever: #Twitter and
"Long term success is the result of small victories we accumulate every day." -- Rick Pitino
putting one in the air 4 my Boy Blaylock in 3..2..1 blastoff ..ignition we have lift off only the best rocket fiel YEA!
I seem to butt-tweet.
Hoes always get beside themselves when they think they are doing something!
is gearing up for another fun filled weekend! Contact us for your next special event! (405)447-2446 www.okcpartybus.com
FT: May not do entire building tour on first day next time. It could be overwhelming
no more :P
Good to know. :)
YES! BREATHE
#CentralFL, how did your family celebrate #MothersDay?
The peacock looking dress?
yes! I am out with lauren rt nowm
why is the redline so hot? I want to die
yes all 600k people who voted for him today live in Waukesha.
although, what's with general public loving to wreck shots if they see an unguarded camera? You've heard it all I'm sure!
Worth noting: in Burlingame, California, they have people at bars who randomly yell out catch phrases from Storage Wars.
Hm....if the Heat don't win a title I think Orlando's GM should be on the phone tryna trade Dwight for Bron or Dwade.
I was there for you. Remember that.
That game turned into a nail biter, but the win makes being cold and in Maryland totally worth it.
Made a LinkedIn account in hopes for recruitment!
Lionel Richie #Easy Like Sunday Morning
My dad thought it was funny to hang a chucky doll on my door...fuckkk that!!
Congratulations to Christian Kramme! He books a print job which will land him on the cover of a new book!
Mmmyyes. I concur. :]
with every bit of me my man. I believe. But I'm terrified and frustrated.
its gonna happen in 25 minutes
Plenty of seats still available for the U of L-Davidson game.
Hows the tanning going ? Im jealous
Trying to explain to someone who knows nothing about grown men and their hip-hop toys is grounds for dumb stares.
Ariana is so sweet to attend her friend's graduation during her tight schedule. Ari doesn't let fame get in the way of the people she loves♥
thanks it's a real great spot. Making lots of hits
Milwaukee, your clouds are really screwing up my super moon festivities--namely looking at it and saying "Well I guess it looks bigger."
If Charles Barkely was my college professor, I would probably fail his class.
Brazil is where I wanna live and I will live there
with wedding planning done, on to mom's bday and Sam's 30th in 3 weeks. I love planning things!
haha!! Yep! Should be anyway. Lol
They like who I am but is in love with the person I have potential to be..
what up with your icon? I like it!
Pennies and dimes for a kiss
What would I do without my best friends ?!
I would hate to have the thunder or the heat defend my team
Sorry, no hints yet just keep watching our twitter and LiveNation.com for info!
you will be new Light Heavyweight UFC Champs!!!! :-)
i know how you feel nick<3333
Yeah, a photo via Flickr that they probably didn't get permission or pay to use.
basically the best show ever
What's that RT I learned a BIG lesson today
its amazing how many peoples bios involve: i love music. i love food.
I graduated in 1967 with dbl major in psych & English. It has served me well.
Bring me some :> RT : Chicken wings & fries plus oranage soda
good luck! Thinking of you!
if you love someone, be brave enough to tell them, otherwise, be brave enough to watch them be loved by someone else.
Hey Mac! Please check out and follow a great touring Atlanta, GA band on twitter and youtube, :)
They arrested someone and now the protesters are frenzied.
These new discoveries and inventions have been, in many ways.
Lets address this: there are Digital natives - kids who have grown up with technology- and the between adults who teach them.
omg well that picture! Look at his twitter it's tylershamy
why is it not an option?! Chuck and Lynnard did it!
squats can cure that.
I got a bad bitch! Yea that bitch right! 👍
Snap the bitch in half.
#Christ is the answer.. #Forgiveness is the #key and #Love unlocks many doors.
Congrats on going vegan. A friend did it a few mos ago & he's happier/healthier than ever.
Summerville, NC. Anyone heard of it?
Congratulations to Forsyth Medical Center on the new Maya Angelou Center for Women's Health and Wellnes. Great for the community.
Looks like I'm watching Harry Potter all night.
I'm not kidding. Either way I am, tonight.
Awww, thank you :)
Wishing I was in Phoenix, AZ where it's a balmy 93 degrees.
they aren't even keeping a hand on him in the video - letting him walk around cycle - cops are way too laid back, I'd say.
Why was Mark Zuckerberg a no-show at today's Facebook pitch to Boston investors?
Don't know HOW we missed your shout out! THANKS SO MUCH! we hope you enjoyed it :)
Is it football season yet? ;-/
Hope you had a wonderful visit!
I decided to do homework at the library because it's quiet. But the guy sitting right in front of me is wheezing incredibly loud. D:
No doubt.
Develop the winning edge; small differences in your performance can lead to large differences in your results. -Brian Tracy
Hello world
why?? Lol jk okay“: text me”
i never under stood y i cant drink milk
HEy guys anyone read tweet well if u didnt read this go to hoods circle soon to get lemonade for a animal shelter
Most Relationships are like garage sales: At a distance it looks like it could be interesting...up close it's just a ton shit you don't ...
Went over to Southpoint to warm up for tomorrow, and ended up chopping their nightly tourney HU for five hundy. Just what I needed tbh.
Do you know what you want to achieve in life? Certain in your goals?
Shout out to the fam FREEWORLDMUZIC
#MyCelebCrushIs five boys from U.K.....ONE DIRECTION <3333333333333333333333
know you'd do the same for me bro :)
DEAD MAN WALKS
IEP success book available
Guess who want it
"Chase shareholders back Dimon" #yahoonews Of course! To him, 2 bil is like bus fare! Where'd I put it again?
Anyone wanna go to taco bell...? Anyone? Anyone...
i'm gonna go search for gold
They could use actual footage from this World Series Game 6 in the next Buffalo Wild Wings commercial.
Watching (the losers)
"The Last Cigarette Ever" episode of HIMYM is, uh, my FUCKING LIFE.
Mmmmwahahahaha ;-) RT : and I wish you the best as well.
and you're also going to follow me, right ? xo
The last day is always such a
to visit???
see you at both!
Pop quiz: What is virtual memory? Best answer gets a prize...
haha not yet at my next spot yessir believe
Just bought #TheLastWaltz by #TheBand on DVD. I'll watch it many times this week. Doing my part to honor the memory of Levon Helm.
Oh your starting roomers?
I'm going to push a new trend to stay home is when the kids are all moved out! imagine time and money at the same time.
waiting for tone to get donee.
your mom knows and likes me... you could have asked.
Just saw "The Fourth Kind" and it scared the crap out of me!
are free falling, someone please get them a parachute!
Thanks for the RT.
I was only trying to be nice! Dododo. #singerprobz :')
Lover, can you propose under the sea in a yellow submarine?
Lets make it happen. RT : thanks for the follow.. Hope to work with you soon!
sounds like the best plan. Enjoy!
Following trends trying to be like the next nigga
"I know it so well.. I know the Hustle so well." No you don't..
Studio time with
is it wrong to add a wireless printer to our baby registry? or a ipod dock? or a flat screen tv? #babykendall will use those eventually
thanks mentioning me...I really appreciate it!
Shatter every window till it's all blown away.
Tweet tweet
What if someone like you found someone like me. Then suddenly nothing would ever be the same.
Panelist for Good Growth warns for you to ".. be [FINANCIALLY] 'prepared' for the Long Haul".
Alan Watts~ Never pretend to a love which you do not actually feel for love is not ours to command.
We'll be in Los Angeles twice this month, and Las Vegas for Memorial Day Weekend. Who else is joining us in the sunny cities?
Thanks! It's so rude, they could just say ' that's so lame' or something else!
RT Today's Association Chat topic is Content Strategy at 2 pm ET! Join in the fun!
Highly technical, scholarly presentations on new technologies begin in a week and some students haven't yet picked a topic. *sigh*
and it is about winning. The kid wants to go to Marquette. Beyond the game they play head to head, that's #1 UW recruiting rival.
“: How many of you guys picked up a copy of the record today?” I did! It rocks!
fantastic. Glad to hear it! Enjoy the game!
I'd worry about elem reading H G without an accompanying discussion. The ethical/societal issues are pretty intense.
Watching Signs for the first time, by myself... Goodnes i hope i dont regret this.
I hate being away when isn't in a great mood 😔! don't worry I'll be back home soon!
good do you miss wowp?
From now until October, BAM is featuring photography from Clyde Butcher and Ray Baldino. Also, stop in to preview the upcoming exhibitions!
Think I'll lay here on the sofa and smile.
that is very helpful. Thanks talking hop bud!
Don't care what I look like,
they're just taking up voter id, as I understand it. Alec into so much more...
Been up all night at work, but couldn't go to sleep till I finished Mass Effect 2, pretty epic game.
work it!!
very true... I have quite narrowed it down yet... I'm really interested in travel, international affairs, and advertising.
Chelsea win by playing Palmetto Soccer
Nice slides of intriguing NOAA work with dataviz & interaction in virtual worlds
he was, but still had the confidence to take(and make) the game winner. Everyone isn't built like that
I so hope that, that someday comes fast! :) Do you have anything in common with him?
Must get on with things before it gets too late! Oh yeah, & I still have not had supper yet. What the heck?
Big things p0pin!!!
. This will be my 5th trip to Lambeau; son has been there dozens of times, a fan since he was 6 years old
Got my eyebrows threaded before work today... Lady asked me why my hair was so thick and curly. I say God must like me
can i have a new phone now or what?
life and happiness is what it's all about!!
Did you start the year off right, with some DeAngelis donuts and coffee?
I wanna bag you like some groceries
Hi Victoria! Can I get a one VICTORIATASTIC reply?? Please? :{))
$ha said she is going to make 2nd offical account! Yay! Follow her
Hey man y do some girls gotta be so dayum ffaakkee
I wish!!!! Things like that require a little more prep time for me though.. Eloping in your future? ;)
I guess i just dont get it. Another lonely holiday...
‎ Hey look, it's a double rainbow ...I'm pretty sure that means you're double gay.
Guys putting Saran wrap on the toilet only works for girls
ohh oops forgot about it...
Newyork apartment rentals & Newyork apartments for rent Search thousands of apartments with the apartment-advisor.com apartment listings.
If you are too concerned about money or fame then how can you be a true artist? Delve deeper into the art & have INTERGRITY instead.
Heda Rose on stage in DC burning it up with Jill Scott's/Raheem Devaughn Band live. Wicked!!
You have enemies? Good. That means you've stood up for something, sometime in your life.
Today is feast day of st mark the evangelist. Will be visiting his church in Venice in less than 3 weeks. Cheering up
d rose isn't playing
Thank you for all that you do for !
Hangin out with daughter and her friend @ "taste of Alpharetta". Its poppin!
->insert funny, witty, or smart ass comment here<-
Cleaning. All day.
THANK YOU.
hello hun check out my blog 4 a free preview of my book hope u enjoy it and get ur copy x
Today 1916: In anticipation of Prohibition, Pabst introduces its first non-alcoholic near-beer: Pablo.
We hope the weather stays clear tomorrow. If not, more time to organize the shop! We will be working rain or shine!!
If we run away, run away, now we won't ever look back.
TOMORROW @ 5! Poet Louise Gluck: reading and discussion in rm 421 affiliated with the Emma Lazarus Exhibit on display in lobby
I can't believe they didn't tell you! I'll have to keep you in the loop next time :] Shes very sweet! She might come to ATL
no love for the #Clippers, but no hate either. Glad to see them more competitive. They need to #DeportSterling though.
#wssmiami "Use the gift giving technique to have your message go viral." Annette Gray
exactly. I'd much rather spend my time doing things than tracking how long I've been doing things.
Derek Landri definitely worth bringing back for another year. See if last season was aberration. PFF had him as 4th most effective DT.
Remodeled clinic eases ordeal of chemotherapy
Ready to go hoop
Nobody wants to take blame for a bad sex session so the right thing to do is bring your A game (both parties)
Seriously, where's the regular season Blues, or the first round blues?
logo quiz will be the death of me.
pain is temporary, pride is forever. Tattooed on my side
I shoulda ate more broccoli as a kid. My chest pubes are lacking hardcore. The old bastards are right for once
The difference between Trayvon Martin & Zimmerman is basically Trayvon had his hood on and Zimmerman didn't! #I'm just sayin'
Sometimes u gotta b thankful 4 the blessings!
Starting LOST.
yes, email it and we will try to have the address changed before it gets shipped out.
right?! but there's nothing wrong with a good laugh ;)
you're right. we accidentally sent that to everyone :( our apologies.
If you're tryna match hit me the fuck up
Odd that makes me go through iTunes to add local music. Would rather just skip over iTunes; barely need it.
LOL hope cameras didn't take pics of u with the sticker!:)
Emily wants me to find Prince Charming... wtf.
Thanks Carey!
how was the bachelorette last night? 76ers/celtics had my attention. were all the guys there for the right reasons?
I agree! I was worried about this as well!
Ready for some playoff football? We are! come join us today. Bloody Mary bar, food and drink specials all day.
It never snows in Williamsburg.
Almost 1000 followers!
I hate to be the one to remind you of this, but here goes: we lose an hour of sleep tonight thanks to Daylight Fucked-Up Time.
That's interesting. Functions as a benefit auction on behalf of artists and collectors.
so do you have an extra ticket for me!!
Time to talk social, mobile and local...
Nice to see at
Be safe tonight. Assign a designated driver. Remember moderation is the key!
The future isn't something we enter, the future is something we create. - Leonard Sweet
you got your own place?! How are you feeling?
#MaydayParadeJake ox you could meet anyone, dead or alive, who would it be?
some people have to learn,some people wait their turn,some people but not me.... I was born a champion!!!
My mom just texted me that my sweet 16 year old dog Copper died this morning. I feel like my heart just got ripped out.
Q. What do you call a witch who lives at the beach? A. A sand-witch.
I won 10 dollars on and instant ticket... lol
#Android issue 23365 (can't run ant test on projects with libraries) killed me so bad. Finally found the bug & workaround!
i fell last night dirty dancing....
You bet, looking forward to your tweets!
OT in FLA. Good luck Devs and Cats - I'm going to bed
Looking good, handsome!! :) miss you a lot!!!
Still not sure if the red eye was the best choice, but I'm home and somewhat recovered after a six hour "nap"
I am such a wallflower.
Crying baby one row back on my plane does not work !!!
Too many kids in in-school suspension, disproportionately black males.
I swear I just heard a little puppy yelp in my apartment.
say sorry!!!
Smaller arts grants awarded for PBS shows
but braces make everything better. just kidding. they rlly dont.
Tonight I learned what Whiz time is... It was funny.
These children learn from cigarette burns, fast cars, fast women and cheap drinks.
ally! I hope it is all over
We always wish Kim the very BEST :)!
Murray State is good...that PG one of best in country glad I picked them to win this one.
yeah your right x3 teehee kant stop looking at me beautifully gorgeous babe x3
Oh yea! I like how it feels!! Tonight we can fly!
Justin performed on stage with a broken leg and people still hated on him. sad sad people.
i've been up since 7. It's too early. I wanna be sleeping not on my way to a soccer game.
Chilly night with an official low at RIA of 22. Cold temperatures will persist today with highs in the upper 30's along with sunny skies.
Blackened chicken sandwich special for today!
out of a bowl, word, then I had like 90percent odds of winning, but didn't win, if u search ssgmusic u can see all the tweets
Yes, but I'm all for it.
Thanks! I was there, i didnt see her, but i did see Prince Harry
Im looking forward to the Pack Vs Rams game. I just moved to Missouri and im going to the game
U.S. Stocks mostly rose by late afternoon trade, with financial shares taking the lead as investors shrugged off Europe's election results.
Right back atcha! RT : , thank you for the good work that you do!
hey girl
Go buy a frozen turkey and take it to #Donuts for turkeys at
Seriously. He has one job.
1st has Mingo ever elected a female County Clerk? Second, were Diamond's allegations to pass the blame on to someone else?
you're preaching to the choir. I tweeted that link a dozen times.
where did u hear this?
liking early Seatle recomendations, Melvins and The Fastbacks especially, just pulled up Hype...I heard of it but never watched it
2 big guys up front inmiller and schwartz to go with thomas, alex, pinkston and lauvao was a smart move
It smells like the ocean in town today. My favorite!
Wow nice day in austin for flipping tires!
I usually take my tree down on January 1st. What about you guys? :-)
World premiere of Bryce Dessner's St. Carolyn by the Sea up next, inspired by Kerouac's Big Sur.
Being hungry and jet lagged past the point of exhaustion is a volatile combination. I better take a long nap today..
Just passed Running Times self-test for readiness for minimalist shoes. Whew!
if ur using Photoshop pick - psd
<~~~ is in love with the Wordpress app he discovered for his phone. It's the little things, yanno?
I wish I could! Sound like it's going to be a fun night!!
“Those who dance are considered insane by those who cannot hear the music.” ― George Carlin
I started my first job out of law school 31 years ago today
Why'd I do that? lol...
Thanks to New Girl, I keep calling Merlot the slut of the vineyard.
Moonpies #Talladega media center..totally shocked. Was expecting carrots and apples.
Wow. Just, wow...RT NYT NEWS ALERT: Judge Sets Bail at $150,000 for Shooter in Trayvon Martin Case
Cooking up a promotion for May that will blow your minds
Responded to FIRE @ 1253 Rogers Ave, Brooklyn, NY 11226 and helped 15 Residents. Red Cross auto update.
I get jealous way too easily, but atleast it shows i care.
Is the best person ever!
Working On My Mixtape Might Perform Somewhere Pretty Soon-KaeSmoove
You'd think people would remember this little thing called religious freedom, and that we are a nation of all religions as well as atheists.
wait hold on but me and still have to make this trip to red lobster eventually.
solid spring break
Hello everyone! I'm new to this so give me a minute! :)
Bought some SINA call options today with the stock at 63.25. When the Facebook IPO comes next month, look for social media stocks like SIN…
Happy Cinco de Mayo to all of our followers!
We officially recognize all moms today. We humbly, gratefully, & w/much adoration thank them for what they do every other day. Thanks Mom!!
Why don't more women wear dresses like in the 1940's?
We are proud sponsors of a 5K Charity run/walk for ... run with us tomorrow! www.kickitforkenya.com
there is always next year, although you will be missed!
Facebook users can find us at ... facebook.com/Orangegroves
Ugh this is why I hate going to bed past 10 on a damn school day, I feel like they poured Benadryl in mg veins.
check out tom pepe's song cupatea and my first song to see if you like that for violin rap
I know! I logged on the other day and Poof! everything changed. Getting used to it though.
She's right too, at least there aren't any dead animals.
I hate you bro! Leo is going this Friday again :')
Just bought a fish from walmart. Named it Kanye. And, he's gay. Hopefully someone else besides me gets it..
Double woo!
Say girl, say, happy birthday
I dont have pix of them lol
See you there! #GetAmbushed RT : Excited for Saturday with
i just followed everyone on here on instagram
Four days until my Birthday!
I hate mrs dehont Uggh she is so annoying
Still in bed
Yes, I'm good. Thank you. I had to take a break. I might re-activate it one day.
What's done is done. Fuck it
heeyy, so you haven't noticed me like ever :/ & you missed my birthday like 2 months ago
#sportingkc lost today...let the overreaction and doomsday talk begin!
This is what makes twitter & Facebook a great marketing medium in this age of advertising and promoting your service or product
don't worry, it's not
Always a good time -- finish you're studying so we can go back for round 2
World Cup - Blatter concerned by Brazil delays
wait a minute.....this kids a douchebag!
My last tweet was in reference to my complicated friends with benefits relationship I've embarked on with my doorman
RT : Start sending your questions for the artists now!
Thought you would! If you've ever heard cicadas...analogy resonated.
#padres home opener!!!!!
I'm not masturbating but, I'm feeling myself.
we are til 8 if you stop by i'll give you one..#kop now owes me :)
Would anyone be willing to do Bar Louie? Our agency is doing HH there at 4. Let me know :)
Thank you so much to everyone that attended our event Thursday! It was an amazing turn out and we really appreciate it.
Definitely got the Bud light platinum randomly at CVS this morning w/o realizing its like their new vehicle product
Want to help 27 million slaves be freed? Download song 2day. Please do it now! Has moved from #62 to #50 in hour. We want 2 get to #1 2day!
Allways been a bad bitch never been a stupid bitch.
Really happy it holds up on multiple viewings!
Babe is sleeping over !
Moment of lightness in morning news: learning from on that Warren Buffett will sing in China's Spring Festival.
Who is tweeting?
The Vicious Red Relic, Love, by former punk frontwoman Anna Joy Springer, is making gorgeous waves throughout the literary world. Now work…
right now?
its like the toostie roll commercial now bc ill never knw
Happy Holidays from !
Just noticed was my 1,000th follow!
United airlines is completely inept...this "company" is ripe for disruption.
I grew up in New York City, Since I was born on Broadway, baby! Black Jesus † Amen Fashion ,, Celebrate Uh Uh Uh ,, Black Jesus x3 On The ♥
My goodness bunch of weirdos
A small body of determined spirits fired by an unquenchable faith in their mission can alter the course of history. Mahatma Gandhi
Raise your hand if you hooked up at #ala10. No? You have 24 hours. THERE IS STILL TIME.
I felt Tyler Perry thru the T.V. that was deep
How's that gameface coming along? I am abt to begin calling bars to see if I can find a TV on which to watch this epic tilt.
Came in the game like speedy Gonzalez
No one ever gives me back what I give them
RT Work hard at what you love. Never give up. Let your results speak louder than the haters words. Repeat.
Da Bitches We Argue About Irrelavent. I Don't Even Remember I Prolly Was Hella Bent. .
I could reach in 2...from #17 tee.
“Prediction is very difficult, especially about the future.” ― Niels Bohr
then come and eat off our SIMPLE & FIT menu at IHOP !
RT!!! Come Dance with me tonight 730pm!!!
Show this fri, 7/8 at Ye Old Town Inn in Mt Prospect. 8:30 with friends! Come get rocked! Shirts and CDs available.
Because they enjoy the irony? :)
wtf.have you been?
Tweaked elbow has left be doing mostly legs for 2 weeks...Feeling like the hulk is building up inside. I WANT TO MOVE SOMETHING HEAVY!!
Scream the things you could never say.
oh yea man watsup...u gotta get a pic on your twitter bro lol
I did hear these guys at sxsw
solo in NYC right now, everybody workin except me- so what the hell am i supposed to do
Hey, look at our new logo for #MLA13!
I should have bought Willow at Target, now every store is closed.
Hello world. OHC on twitter is back!! Follow me =D
RT : This is the dumbest football team in the history of the world.
last night was amazing!!! Hope to see you guys again soon!!!
Any word on Rice or Flacco signing with the #Ravens before season starts?
I am tweeting from my grave cause Justin has finally killed me.
Wow, #Penguins. Wth are you guys doing?
If metro drops my call one more fucking time....
- great paper! Thanks! And timely - we are in the middle of our first serious epub project.
I can't even process the thought of watching the finale :(
Today was so weird but fun :) .............maybe this week hasn't been as bad as i thought
I'm scary spice
dude, if you want your 90's kick, go watch cant hardly wait. m jennifer love hewitt
where you be
Yea I Still Care About U But How Much Should I When Ur Not My Woman?
Don't think I can make it to Gwar tomorrow, so I may have to make a showing at the HOG meet & greet at 3
finally opening grad gifts and cards...
#Badgers are a 4 seed and will face the Montana Grizzlies in Albuquerque
Goddess of History.
damn she mad -.- she really said "my new boyfriend "... -.-''
2012 Ms. SF Leather is on October 27th! Save the date!
CD Mastering, Online Mastering, Audio Mastering, Mixtape Mastering 48hr Master One Place
You too :-)) RT Hope you all have a day filled with joy and cooperative people :).
When life gives you Mike's Hard Lemonade, you're probably gay.
I have to go to work and I look like I have two black eyes.... Wtf
This series is both awesome & agonizing! Back-and-forth-&-back-and-forth!
Don't see the e-book exhibitors talk, was it recorded?
Have you guys hear the song 'Trouble' by Never Shout Never?
RT : Shout out 2 the ladies! Carpe diem! "The thing women have yet to learn is nobody gives u power. U just take it."Roseanne Barr
Wen I get retweed I feel like a motherfuckin superstar
In honor of first parade, we'll be featuring a "Night" image from our historic Mardi Gras archives on our FB page tomorrow
you should make a twitter for Mirror Shane :D
Thank you!
- yeah, well…compared to Florida, we don't have bugs. :) I see ants and moths, grasshoppers…uh…bees/wasps…flies…
Why should you be content with so little? Why shouldn't you reach out for something big? - Charles L. Allen
But I'm tired of rapping off of people's beats,I wanna make my own.
the blondetourage is about to get blonder.
thank you! Hope you're enjoying #peru!
I'm going to be an AUNT!!!! Congrats to my brother and his wife! Naturally I'm going to be the best aunt ever!
#Love Food...good for the soul...
Dont forget 2 come over to Paradigm Gardens this weekend for our Summer Blowout Sale! Most products are 10%-75% Off.
Thank you!
burbank is the best airport! so chill, waiting for my flight to SFO and then on to DC for the screening at Museum of the American Indian
it was Casper
this track "Blue Moon" by is smoking...it's making my work day a lot smoother..
my parents say I can't either! :(
careful. It's like the joke about being the smartest man in the room: You're in the wrong "room."
I know that I am here and you are there, but we still have our love
..with the fan support needed to bring on higher $ players. That's what worked in the 90's & that's what's needed now.
what astonishes me most is that you'd have to pad a resume to get that job...
make two dreams come true but following me nd 1
it is, and the fact that's she's dead serious makes it even better
RT - Smh... somebody just asked me if jacksonville still had da Jaguars....*sighs* I'm go sit back down before I hurt ...
I like that.
-smiles sweetly, showing my dimples- Hello there.
best mussels ever, and great music. see you there
These chicks crazy
I think that the modeling I'm watching now are stupid and is not organized properly they are complicated
Thank you, thank you!
Singing! I knew Barnbaum would deliver.
n u didnt invite me?
Cody Jasper is one his generations best guitarists.
I'm not sure what I did to deserve this, but I'll take it. Thank you, thank you, thank you.
I know I'm not perfect -and I don't live to be- but before you start pointing fingers make sure you hands are clean!” ― Bob Marley
Happy Birthday to the best linebacker in the history of the game !
Obedience is the mother of success and is wedded to safety
are you doing active or all time?
ash.....miss you all!......are you in georgia?
We share the same taste in cuisine LOL
WATCH LIVE: News conference at landfill on search for 5-year-old
Online ticket sales end at noon. A limited number of tickets available at our admissions area beginning at 2 pm. Cheers!
It's really hard to drunk text when you can't see
Watching the news... Two teachers got into a fight
RT : a big dont is to stop adapting,or stop learning. The world is constantly evolving
no more rules...let the music set you free!!!
Tweeting my twitterific thoughts on the matter of my paper slogging atm
we have to make good ole Opperman proud!
#I #fucking #hate #people #I #really #do. PrincessCiera
#nowplaying Truth of A Liar - August Burns Red
We need to sell ourselves and tell our story. -Diane Reiss, professor , on how to keep women in academe.
We've had food trucks driven in but never an oven! Very exciting :)
i like my girls head south and they ass north----> #Cking*
ya da Knicks had a good season i think its gone 4-0 sweep
I'm about to go from ashy to classy.
Simple. RT : Truth, relevance, unselfishness, simplicity, timing - TRUST leads to #likeability -
Don't mind me if I get weak in the knees. You have that effect on me. You do.
I hate I can never fall asleep once I'm up -.-
Thanks, Dan! You sure are swell!
Dave can you start calling the race early I have to go to work?
You can now get your big-ass sandwiches with The "pay with " app, open a tab, order and you're done!
"There aren't many things you're good at, but being a fucking creep is one though." My coworker. Spot on.
we're pretty close to Canada, so come on up. I think we can take a boat there, btw.
Wish someone would bring me tres leches
A brutal schedule. RT : If #Nuggets complete rally and win first round, they would open semis at #Thunder on Monday night.
I had bets on
Hey you stupid fucks......when you go drink at Sauvies, take your fucking trash with you. Don't be a piece of shit.
I was just going to tell you you need to listen to it!
Students who may have a non-business undergraduate degree looking to enter the field of business will also benefit from this program.
And based on his performance tonight, Dwight's doing his best to get SVG fired on the court too.
I been sleeping allday
": Did the celtics already play?" Blew philly out
How fun! Tell him I said hi! Greetings from West Texas to West Virginia to Kunming :-)
Cotto! Cotto! Cotto! Such a close fight. Two rounds to go and it very well could be even right now.
Your library is now open 24/7 until May 8. Good luck on the final papers and final exams!
Avs overpaid! Caps gotta B happy to get so much for a player not in longterm plans. I wish Broncos could trade Orton for a #1 & #2!
Please pretty please follow me! love you xoxo<37
On the job search? RT : Google your name + name of most recent employer. What comes up (or not) is more important than resume or CV.
Wood Ranch BBQ on a Saturday afternoon :-)
been to sleep twice today!? Mono, I went to bed at 5am, got up at 10am stayed up, went to work till midnight, and...
N it definitely was a waste of time and #tragic cuz he came in the house too late bt im not mad i understand y
Lets rewind to 7 months ago so i can be esley the good girl again :p RT : okay okay your not:) & dont we all!!!
Hope Griffin is okay
Melloy Dodge needs good used cars! Trade yours in for $5000 over KBB.
The Movie Sensei officially gives #Contagion the Red Belt Status! To see the Sensei's rating system, click here: twitpic.com/4g2t8k
Chrome was being a real jerk this morning, so I am relegated back down to Firefox.
Did u tell him??
Want to easily tell your fans where youre cooking? Fill em in on Antengo a free app with real-time, location-based classifieds
People say girls are attracted to guys who are like their fathers. Not me. The guys I date call me back.
Thank You, Sallie! Ur a sweet Blessing! {Hug} :)
Yall sure did keep up the good work
Brewers! Brewers! Brewers! Brewers! Brewers! I'm so flipping excited, I don't even know what to write.
Thanks for the Retweet! We are looking forward to it.
Thanks for letting me share DC story. Dave you did a great job playing host!
« #oomf a Freak with these tweets»
It was #Adele with the broken vodka bottle in the hash bar. R.I.P Amy!
We might burn like gasoline & fire, but it's a chance we'll have to take.
that is the best horse_ tweet in a while
Delta Passengers filmed the bird strike that hit the engine of the plane they were on! Delta complaining iPad should have been turned off?
And just realized that two weeks from Tuesday I start the Fruit Feast cleanse. Blinking. Blinking some more. haha
youre the greatest
what u mean no explanation I'm tryna figure out what u mean
i haven't seen the books. A Markakis, Roberts and (presumably) a Jones contract won't break a franchise.
the problem is people are addicted and can't give it up. Fans spend a ton on this game and nowadays extra $ are scarce.
yup I am. Listening?
How To Train Your Dragon can not open soon enough! I feel like it should have opened in Jan! Can I move on to Iron Man 2 and Shrek 4 yet?
Great web site! You mention Quality Management Assessor this is interesting, any more data on this available?
i think i peaked creatively with my UM-commissioned collection of Spanish children's songs...
Its boring!!!
Having a favorite/home team sets you for disappointment 19 out of 20 years.
Fantastic day shooting the diner scene and museum scene getting ready for nights this week - gotta have a lot of coffee :)
Pro-love is your #rapture out of a world of hate.
OH: re: Housing Shortage in San Diego -"They aren't making more dirt, but they are still making more babies! "
good rest for the Big 3, Neal, Leonard, and Jackson.
yhur birthday is 2maro.. we will talk about it then. Lol
I'm STILL at the bowling ally but their playing boyfriend by justin bieber<3
"A general air of tension, marked by frequent bursts of laughter, seems to pervade the throng."- THE STRAW
That picture is rad. I'm completely jealous. Have a blast man!
Just keep spinning just keep spinning
thank you!! I love them they add a different touch and keep me warm :)
#ALLIN ready for the War Sunday Mario!! Good luck and Go Big Blue!!!
following back
., feel like making a dream come true on this fine Friday? It's easy: just wish a very happy birthday.
Follow the beautiful n get a S/O n an #InstantFollowBack!!
I'd be interested to read studies of the types of libraries (public, academic, etc) that are most active on twitter/FB.
That's not very friendly, is it?
ha #bringthenoise and cute crying babies too! “: Are you implying we were super noisy? :)”
The thing scratching my window :(
they slow u down and give u bad reps i feel ya!
Just got off the phone with my daddy #TeamCeltics 💚🍀💚🍀💚
Last night must have been that awesome
Question(no offense to anyone): when the fuck did we start following Justin Bieber? -Damien Wolfe
Check it out! Representing
if says ok then we can!
this pitcher is trying to take out their kneecaps!
We're off to the Federal for dinner before the show, Ryan Roberts Trio with Matt Yeakley.
Apartment fire. All residents safe. This includes my mother. Red Cross called. Fire Dept investigating. Bldg standing but totaled.
lmfao at Herd right now lol
Last tweet for you. I know you don't want to know someone who makes cupcakes like that.
Great show last night! Bollywood was amazing! You and do a great job! Cant wait to be on a show like
I don't mind if your not going to help me, but stop working against me
Happy birthday to my beautiful and remarkable wife, ! I learn from her everyday.
lol I was bout to say , and thanks
LMAO. Im good bro. cant complain. Workin on a new Tape as well bro.
Just ran the Columbus 10k - my first race - in under an hour and feeling great! Time for some serious lunch action.
Nice to see KU didn't show up 2nite. Bad for my bracket but good for big ten.
Are you going to take a fancy photo for it?
The Marlins are going to sign Heath Bell
Well, on the bright side, the REAL bullpen didn't get used. Pomerantz looked damn good.
I wonder the same thing every time I see that commercial!
Leyland on Inge/Raburn struggling "thats just part of the game, they have to fight their way out of it and I'm sure that will happen"
Dudes, how was #Wits on Friday?
Looking forward to the BCBG show & seeing the new Fashion Week set-up.
Your Twitter entry for the Valentines Day Giveaway is in! Good luck!
If your in SAG or AFTRA, please support
So what is your vote iphone or Android?.... so far iPhone leading
Tiao He Cleanse: $43 Intensive full body cleansing became popular bc the synergistic effect of the 6 products created a remarkable result!
What other game would I bring? RT : you better bring your A game to Carlsbad!
this is why ticks are so scary- they can survive almost anything!
I DM you my #
i just want school to be over and brad paisley to come sooner
Addicted to the Adam Corolla podcasts!!!
damn! that foot...she missed it and got all curled up in a ball. my hands are now sweaty but was grt to hear that click of the draw
SHOT"S GO OUT TO ON THE COME UP SHOW ..TUIN IN IN THREE MINS..ASAP!!
lol already did
Damn it Brandon - Porcello not gonna make it out the 1st inning
Nobody is perfect. Thats why pencils come with erasers(:
Will I see you at one of my summer signings?
Song's an island sounding party song called "chuck my money"
C u Next Tuesday!
Lotsa zine events happening in the week leading up to the fest...
not at all
lolz! Lies & more lies
I got a ATL necklace from hot topic anyone wanna see it no ok 
Tweeting in Spanish >>>
Thanks for the follow! We look forward to reading your tweets
Any suggestions on good Marketing books?
do you do any other shows ? ;)
lol It is possible that is what I am talking about!
Darmen? Sounds like your barista missed his morning coffee. lol
This is the absolute worst-case scenario that the #Caps could have hoped for. They are being outplayed in the first five minutes.
Just ordered my new Droid X phone - very exciting! I'll update upon arrival next Friday! Thanks for the recommendation, !
haha!:P and thanks!!:)
So happy Michigan won. GO BLUE... WE won the BIG 10 title, well with 2 others but still we won!
I'm a sucker for a fancy lower-case g.
yes I am
man my ankle hurt
Yes, I love him.
when i saw his face i started screaming.
LMAO no omfg, but those are my favorites. I would imagine they'd be making a new one in the future, it was really popular
#RunningQuote: "Running is the greatest metaphor for life, because you get out of it what you put into it." -Oprah Winfrey
working on an imprinted sunglass request. Not only perfect for summer, but wonderful for winter and snow events!
Check out my NFL selections and picks video on www.thechiefsports.com See why I took the Rams, Niners, Chargers, Jags and Bengals
First the Crosby Sweepstakes, now the Jagr Sweepstakes? Come on people. He can still score, but he only has a year or two left in him.
we know you recently posted about biking in #Indy - check out our new MTB series & share if you think followers would enjoy! :)
Money talks boosie will walk
i miss seeing around. her ass went GHOST.
Absolutely. Great moves to give Luck help.
Just finished new stone collection "Metamorphosis ". From Ordinary to Extraordinary!! Coming soon to
"If you don't like what's being said, change the conversation."
We don't even have to do anything exciting or fun...I just wanna spend time with you.
Forgot to tell you how much we loved you on #Torchwood. Great reverse head shot! (scooter guy & son from Minchin show)
Is it weird when I eat m&ms I make sure I eat all the other colors first so I end up with only Gator/Broncos colors?
Word. I'm 3K miles away. RT : Don't take living near your family for granted
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe~ Nothing is as terrible to see as ignorance in action.
THAT MOVIE WAS SO GOOD!
Major turf war for the last few days. Drive by clawings.
niocee~ I always think of it when its rains:3!
I am unlike anyone you have or ever will see
"I couldn't wait for success, so I went ahead without it" - Jonathan Winters
Stop by registration to get your Melbourne cup horse.
It's 4/20? Happyy Birthdaay Lint-Licker! Even though we're cousins, we act like brother & sister. I love you! Don't get too crazy tonight!
I made a quote just like this in a diff picture about blue eyes but then I lost it then I found this pic and I was happy
Thanks for the original tweet. It's indeed a sad day for the wild rumpus of young readers' lit.
Gnite..Happy Birthday Mom!
Porcello's cut sleeves are shorter than normal.
i didn't find any tickets, but i'll be in NYC on new years eve already. Can we still hang out :)
My boy Nemanja is 21!!! Happy birthday man.
RT : TNT's Steve Kerr on the #Lakers: "This just doesn't look like a championship team."
Fresh out the shower
well i said it would be chippy just had no idea it'd be in my neck of the woods and not just on the court...
Thank you for ur support!
If we do lose well keep it close
Get your cameras out! Super nova full moon Tonight - Brightest and LARGEST it'll ever be ! Best view at 8:35
RT I need volunteers to go through a Community Manager Foundations class I'm developing with Argyle Social.
: " music always catchy make you sing it all day"duh
wanna go skating?
So true! Learning rules.
at dca waiting for blue line
I just love coffee it simply makes me all happy and warm and fuzzy. Also let's me forget the fact that I got 4 hours of sleep last night😱
Watching on blogtv. It's been at least 6 months since the last time I watched a blog. I've missed it. ❤
we can say that Ihop is giving away pancakes in response to Denny's free grand slam breakfast offer
It's not me, it's you. Actually, it's the taxidermy of you and me.
I start work tomarrow finally :)
It's ironic that #SecretAvengers is the best G.I. Joe book that's actually NOT G.I. Joe.
Sexy salsa but lame talking by the other football player
Guess who's giving presentations at four Bay Area REI's this summer? Teddy Roosevelt. Just kidding - he's dead. It's me.
Just saw Gwen Ifill from PBS Newt HQ. He's on his way to give his victory speech. We never partied with Republicans before.
dogs in strollers, sitars, pianos; gosh I love Washington Square Park
If you criticized Lebron a month ago for choking in the finals, you better criticize these girls, cuz they just did the same damn thing
Facebook: "What's on your mind?" Twitter: "What's happening?" Myspace: "Where did everybody go!?" (Stolen)
develop more easy-to-use apps for Mac to have fun on Apple devices.
Follow me please! I Love you so much 1-4-3♥, never change! You're amazing. I'm addicted to #SoListen. I'm Uruguayan! I Love You
#Heat-Lakers um the LAKERS r going to win whos watching the game and paying attention to the score cuz i am and its looking pretty good!
Looks like the crowds are definitely back downtown. Good to see you all
the "ecosystem" drawing we put on the napkin last night was our attempt at a start.
Going shoe shopping after work today. Do they make light up shoes for adults? Let's hope so! Going for it.
RT : Time for #runchat so you all have been forewarned.
Not awesome: tummy still hates me. - happy happy birthday if I don't make it later!
#CanIBeHonestWithYou ? I love you. a lot.
I used to want to be a scene model, but I grew up. It's time you do to. ;)
Got big plans for tonight? We do! #PinterestParty 7PM tonight with Join in!
#mobprocconf collateral surveillance and power asymmetry (referencing licoppe)
what you buy every gun they have in call of duty?!
This version of the iPhone software (2.2.1) is the current version. Damn
next 1st take, one on one, Stephen A vs. Skip. My moneys on Skip!
I own the DVD.
Finally seeing #ThinkLikeAMan !! Still a sold out crowd, in a few days I will see
agreed. It's baffling that the only formal communication b/w GUSA and funding boards is through a Senate committee
Updating 8 portfolios is a lot of work!!
are you coming to our #Women-Owned #Business #Networking Social on 3/20 ?
all we have is now, the only constant we know and never understand
Stickn to my plan for 2012
The Truth just dropped a Tebow!!!!
Divine cooperation and synchronicity are established in my consciousness, my experience and my expression.
I go to bed with anxiety I wake up with anxiety.. just wonderful
what r the odds that political corruption in Il. Will evr b cleaned up
Happy St.Patricks Day to you too!
More like what I'm gonna do
Emailing, as you suggested, following my ping of yesterday ...
Washington Business Journal named Maslow the #1 #Media Production Company for 2012!! TY for this great honor.
school lunch is so nasty.....
wishin I didnt have to explain this to Joshua!
Madden: need to make sure all criminal justice programs are evaluated, set goals and require them to report results.
RT “: I love you. You are the object of my affection and the object of my sentence. ― Mignon Fogarty"
So many problems could be solved by many Michael Keatons.
We, The home of the WICKED are so pumped for the Boston Red Sox to start! #KeepUpTheGoodWorkInFL #BostonOnTheRun Follow back??
Appreciate all the followers&retweets :)
I was born a leader the only time I might follow is on twitter.
Check us out on Facebook: Coastal Aquatic Creations
lol, yeah right
im on my way home(:
Results are in! SPJ Awards winners are posted at www.spjsandiego.org. Look for your name & join us at awards banquet July 7!
Me 2! C u there! MT is looking forward to presenting at the 2012 American Studies Association meeting in San Juan Puerto Rico!
Dawn... you made it, welcome!
Final score: Virginia 5 NC State 1
Tosa had a house fire earlier @ 2409 N 63, 1 smoke victim. Nothing going on now, just waiting for
thanks for mentioning Devon! He is an inspiration and it gives the kids at Eaglecrest something to root for!
Fabulous session with on facilitating online learning! OMG!
No class tomorrow. Happy labor day.
You never know just how the story ends or how the story goes.
you dont honestly think im not already following do you?
photo of typo shirt please?
just followed u now follow me twizzler lol rabies
Too exhausted to keep reading tweets. Mentally drained now. Exit light. Enter night. Take my hand. Off to never never land...
T minus 63 minutes.... #Go Blue! Sparty sucks!
okay awesome! Haha I didn't either!
so proud of ur kalbi jim. For record, mama DID serve it like that
excited #edcamphilly on Saturday, always a joy to surround myself with passionate educators, giving up a full Saturday to connect and learn
RT : I don't know how to do this stuff well but I hope you got my congrats. I'm in Showboat w/Joel. He is funny []
Daily Special, Tue 05/15/12 - Roast beef, ham, turkey, choice american/swiss, lettuce/tomato/pickle/onion, on italian roll, w/ FF. $6.09 RT
dude. I saw you today in your car and might I say, you have an awesome car.
Thanks Christy!! I'm super excited about it #BeanTastic!!
IB tests, meaning i can chill all day in class. all day.
You could be watching the 678th GOP debate with the rest of us : tree of life...tree of boredom.
Great job on your spoken word performance #JyreikaGuest. Thanks for being a #FreedomFighter at
Big run by the Illini....need Leonard to go off or I have no chance in this $5 Big Ten game...
Avant made me so mad today.
Now that the dust has settled, I have to admit: I wasn't a fan of the "Swagger Wagon" video. There, I said it.
#Scandal is the type of show you sip some brown liquor while watching. It's that intense.
When I want to do something I always think "would a dumb person do that?" If they do, then I do not do such thing.
Did you see #MySinatra this past weekend? Tell us what you think!
Do you know what always annoyed me? That for all seven seasons of Voyager they wore the old DS9/TNG uniforms. Yeah I know, nitpicking.
Crunch time
Good luck tonight!
guess whose defense I have playing this week :-(
RT “: You were born to be real, not to be perfect."
That guy on the Telly was amazing with horses
Seven more weeks until the Best Summer Ever.
thanks for the follow and support Mickey keep cheering for your favs and check out
Thanks, ! I wore the shirt today. Love it! :)
as yall can see the Lakers fans are all pissed
dated no way? Certain subjects each sex excels. Prefer single sex education any day!
#changeofplans out to walk franklin street verrryy son! mario & luigi bout to do it again, and again ...maybe one more time
RT Why is it always war with us?:"(
OK, brilliant. Something on the theme of #innovation or #crowdsourcing, perhaps?
miami (ohio) has informed b roethlisberger that he will be permitted to walk with other students but bathroom breaks will not be allowed
should be fun. Big show in a bigger venue. Is a gal on the guest list? Lol
hahahha cant believe a frog just jumped in our house and our cat flew across the room like a bat out of hell and hubby rescued from cat :)))
and : Don't want to lose your constituents' support and your seat? Listen to us. Reject SOPA and PIPA.
it's snowing!
Oh good! No worries then.
That is the truth. Another dude killed his uncle by beating him over the head with a hammer. Stuff is just crazy!!
Feeling blessed and surrounded by love thanks to and
Wearing my wedding ring for the first time, doesn't feel like a part of my hand yet
ATT settles class action over termination fees AP - AT
thanks! the updated deadline isn't listed on the web site.
so many hot deals... You have less than a month to prepare for my visit to #NYC u betta
Me too! I miss you! The show was so great! It was so good to see you, Mitchell and Ms. June! Let me know when you do another show!
I have menudo and comfort food for you!!
Nice popcorn maker!
Another part of Florida next time....
Every1 loves Barbara Bush's Wellesley speech in '90, she did not do as well at Northeastern a few years later
Giving is better than receiving because giving starts the receiving process. -Jim Rohn
call me soon as he start coming tell Cajun to face time me
Milwaukee WI Im down to put my city on the map I see how yall do it where yall from but home is where my heart at so I'm a cheesehead jack
WORKS FOR ME
#thomaskeller favorite simple roast chicken recipe & yet-to-be-released #fessparker #whitewine - perfect Sun night dinner!
Can You Follow Me :(
Tonight is National Night Out! Get out and meet your neighbors tonight...its going to be a beautiful night!
It's Thursday , You Already Know What It Is...
Living the glamorous life -- Brunch at the #RitzCarlton in #SouthBeach Miami!
RT One friend can change your whole life.
thanks! It's a great movie!
it would be great, but i would be hard to communicate. i dont speak the best english. ;)
We appreciate the compliment!! Hope y'all are off to a great 2012!
Random tweet. Lmao =)
Hopefully gunna be gettin some clan matches goin this weekend!!!!
I mean 8 mexicans in the room..
Literally...The Avengers Was The Greatest Movie I've EVER SEEN. & I Plan To See It 30 More Times Before It Comes Out On DVD
thanx to for throwing game 6,We hope you stay in cleveland . Mogotti and only the loyal C-town loves u
Q3. Favorite TV series growing up.
Tweetdeck always crashes on me #frustrating but I love #hootsuite for iPad
Showed my friend a pic of a guy & her reaction was "it's like you looked up the definition of #sexpervert in the dictionary"
“: Need a tip on how to make good music? Make sure there's an accordion in there somewhere and it's gold.” Agreed.
#stopkony I heard #TOMS shoes was gonna partner with #invisiblechildren but they couldn't find their feet.
....three more hours
STOP SENDING ME F4F'S PLZ :)
HELL YEAH. I gotta go to Church though /: when I get back? ;) we finna show these nigletssssssssss up!!!
Holy freaking #HEAT! This is crazy. Make sure to #water your #plants. Stop in at Paradigm Gardens and Cool off!
Thank you! I've recently launched and looking to create a strong marketing campaign. Is that something you can help with?
we forgot to say (excuse our tardiness), thank you for the encouragement. Glad you enjoyed the panoramas!
I had 2 look him up 2 be sure the story I'd heard was true. I agree we have many problems between skin color that need serious love.
I don't think so. I care about it in general, but I'm so sick of hearing about it. I'm glad I'm not a local reporter.
YOU HAVE NO IDEA HOW EXCITED I AM TO SEE YOU!!(:
I wonder if water is grossed out by soda- because its so gassy?
Thank you for the RTs!
Me too PJ!!
what's missing in #grefine for you?
If you ain't got no ass bitch wear a poncho
See them now! Scentsy is so great....45+ warmers and 85+ scents. One for every decor.
At the gym and workin hard. Sweating like #whitneyHuoston at an intervention.
what? lol. I don't even know you..
Anyone else think they gave Syracuse the hardest division? Osu, fsu, k state, cincy? Looks pretty hard to me.
marlon perkins' wild kingdom sponsor
Wow I was just wishing for a new Shins album. What should I wish for next?
Dylan!!! Tell us already! We're dying here!. :/
If only you knew, I'd be with you...
mostly with you making fun of me I feel.
Yea that is true. You might have to. I watched Spaceballs as a child so I was use to it. Lol
RT : If you haven't received your #SAGAFTRA merger ballot or have any ?s regarding merger, please call (toll free) 855.724.2387.
Why don't blends sell as well as varietals? -- viewer question
you're more than welcome to marry that horse poop city you call home! :P
Why thank fuckin' god? I think you're giving him to much credit.
aren't you in school ? tf'
You two always make me laugh!
I don't know who that guy was but Kudos to you, sir, for taking the Mick out of the annoying Angelina. Was it crowded onstage w/ her ego?
going viral ;)
my mom told me to follow my dreams thats y i follow & ♥
oceansize is the best band i've never heard until now
Feeling smart for getting registration badges last night instead of today
i dnt think so, i think they sellin mo toma I hop cause my mom was on at 10am and couldnt get vip
i wanna know at what time ya'll going to premiere Justins video tomorrow
Beautiful day in a beautiful city...
already read it. It sucked.
I need a new Draw Something opponent. #anytakers ?
Bahaha. I saw this & was like "so did I..."
And my favorite Wrigley chant was... Brunansky's wife's a dyke. Brunansky's wife's a dyke.
Thank you for RT! Best wishes for a healthy and prosperous New Year!
can you get your followers to follow me plz and ill TRY to get you SOME followers tweet bakk plz
You don't think Saturday is washed up?
Tired of being home alone. It's just me and Benjamin for the night
Only a fifth to a quarter of #kids #apps are paid for; rest are free.
new opportunity starting up in LA... can't wait
gotta love those sticky keys
We haven't mentioned the DCGOP. I think you might be talking about someone else's account.
oh my gosh, I did not mean dad! I meant dog!! hahah
You misspelled my twitter name...
ik tht people say stuff but tht just means there jealous at what they dont have(:
Nah, it was a pretty good time. But times are good now too. Too many people wasting time bitchin
You know you are a fan when you drag your mom to the show with you :)
a) you look adorable. b) this is hilarious.
Survey: 1 in 3 Kids Hurt Playing Sports
or do you not think so far ahead? cause i been thinkin' bout forever
Today I'm going to focus on what I need to do today and not what I wish I had tomorrow. Only in focus is there success. Thanks Uncle Rush
Lmao.. That would be awesome!
thats cool but i meant is that you in your pofile pic if so your beautiful
back off haha it's a great show.
Heidi Klum is getting a divorce.
not really ,don't be using me, but when u trying to go
RIP Whitney, you were the best!!!
Its bad when one manager asks another a question and the response is " you'll get a better answer from him. Not her" & her is a mgr he isn't
was like an 8-9% mixture bloomed we shot a ballistics gelatin w a 308 sniper rifle...still retained shape
anything going on tonight?
baby girl pull yo pants up I only want yo face *we onnat*
#IdFangirlIfJustin caked me.
totally. that guy's a wank!
Mindless Behavior
Are they actually allowed to do that? I mean, I would love it, but didn't we elect Biden as our VP, and not Clinton?
PURE SATURDAY'S at FUSION w/ Dj Equis are no longer in effect. 18+ AFTER HOURS are STILL AT CLUBX. LIVE Friday at ClubX 18+ Shocka Shock
At the environmental priorities workshop talking media/ communications. #smartypants abound!
My company is hiring sales associates, let me know if you are interested!
Commercial break again.
I deleted ALL pics of me, and changed my location
What's on your to-do list for the house?
Q2. Companies integrate mobile w/in multi-channel mix in a holistic way achieve 49%greater sales trans vs. non-mobile mix
Congratulations Skip. Hard work and persistance pay off. Keep it up.
RT um where you work--reliant park!!
how are you? you do?
You're a jerk! I was being nostalgic.
my new goal in life is to get #jesstweet trending
Do not dwell on those who let you down. Cherish those who hold you up!
Decisions decisions decisions. Guess it's a good problem to have.
Whenever you make a mistake or get knocked down by life, don't look back at it too long. Mistakes are life's way of teaching you.
Everyone follow ! Lets make this site the best USA site for !
Hahaha! I guessed 4/5 of the top 5 guys too! :) Let's see who I can get in the wild card. I'm hoping for Erika, Brielle, and Reed!
What is your #FamilyTradition on #StGeorgesDay?
GoogleGeo: "In the beginning there was Code, and Engineers saw this and they thought, 'Cool!'" And everyone else thought 'Huh?'"
I'm saddened that Nutgrabber69 didn't acknowledge my Words with Friends request. He must be busy. Grabbing nuts, I suppose.
75% of consumers will buy your product if they like you on Facebook.
Lol, WE FOUND DOVE IN A SOAPLESS PLACE
will we see you tonight at Aloft DIA? 6pm. open to all! come see what is all about! for men too!
Follow and by Be Human on iTunes ASAP!
I wish you would tweet me:/
lmmfao omg tell him to b safe wit u
JcPenny is on crack if they think I'm spending $80 on cowboy boots.
I look at all the lonely people.
follow back??:)
I feel so warmed when I get a new fake Twitter follower. I'm talking about you,
S/O for the opportunity for our artist Mr. My$ta to perform at ur block party
Good morning (:
Can I be the opening act (singer) for your comedy tour?
S/o to the #LoyalFANS of YOUR #CHICAGOBEARS!!!!!! WE ARE !!!!
Ima start drawing people faces n called my álbum making love faces
RT : Must commit to memory RT : Wait wait wait....a Lesbian cock block is called a Beaver Damn?
hahah nah she's not very Internet "social"
Jake Keefer with another nice stop.
Man, y'all know how to have fun.
Mailing is fine. Did Access Tucson contact you?
and Bobby Moynihan remind me of the original #SNL cast.
That's it! I have decided to go on a Markers Mark Free Diet! Holy cow that drink tastes so good but need to let it go!
I was just lucky to have a mom that bought me the cassette; growing up in the bible belt and all.
"The unconscious is much wiser than the conscious mind"
I always pick up plastics in the area.They are so polluting!
Congrats to Haywire. Just made it onto my worst 10 movies of all time list.
thank u now get the other two to be happy lol im gettin it left n right for not sayin i had a boo i said im talkin to this girl
Dear Ladies!! Happy International Women's Day!!!!
I'm the guy with my hands up their ass.
Can someone explain to me why "Crash Your Party" is not on Karmin's album?
When I have. A drem of somebody that don't even talk to me!I never won wake up!!!
Thanks guys! Those popsicles are so good.
Im so tired -.- Idk why.. Im just super exhausted
Patty Mills has 22 points, James Anderson has 16 and DeJuan Blair has 12. The Spurs lead the Warriors 73-65 with 5:54 left in the third qt.
Im gonna whip your legs off your legs. What remains will just be a cruel reminder of what legs once were. haha #3?
Happy Pittsburgh Craft Beer Week!
Reason 29 to love the BBA: Every year we have an elected board that donates their time to support the BBA.
I can unfollow as quick as I follow or quicker.....
yeah defiently :), we need to sort out ice skating!
Is that a new series or the one that has been around for a while?
Stay thirsty my friends
you're welcome! Happy New Year!
Doesn't MR see that Beltway excuses VP gaffes? I'm a diehard O supporter who didn't want Biden; realized his gaffes don't matter
I'm looking into giving my current site a new look
Dear Cheesecake Factory, your delicious 1,000+ calorie dinners will be the death of me Sincerely, everyone
does anyone care to guess who the winner of original song will be>
500 - tell a friend to visit our Facebook page helping us to reach 500! Thank you
RT : Do colors make you think of social movements? Let's have a colorful conversation about how color can create good....
thnkin about rippin one in car on the way to work. probably not a good idea. i might get left in dripping springs
Virtual Choir Live Streaming from LIncoln Center. over 3000 singers from 73 countries. #LCChoir to join the discussion
im more then in love with him & im going to bed I'll talk to you tomorrow
Who is your weight-loss inspiration for 2011? We are going to reveal ours today...
it's ok u just seemed a little irritated
Sushi is the best, if u ever in Atl stop by Twist Restauraunt on Peachtree.....
because no one is tired yet. (:
smh lmao ask if I can sleep over in a few days
Hella just dropped my phone on my bottom lip -.........-
williams-sonoma is now selling beehive starter kits and chicken coops.
Ahh we now have less than 24 hours left! Hurry up and be Tuesday💗 I need Jonathan/Sebastian to burn down the world😱
Words that excite during #GOLF RT Wow .. Or better yet RT Wow wow wow
Steve Jobs was an innovator, inventor, kind soul and genius. We will miss him
hahaha alright I promise I won't quit!
Limone: San Diego's Newest Pop-Up - San Diego Reader (blog)
Huge Boxing class tonight at the gym. Duke is making 'em sweat! The Swittels are in the house!
PHILIP <3 OMG
Some people on twitter can be so fucking annoying..
I don't know how I manage to break things so easily!
Even my lawyer b askin iz it dope!..
Sweet! RT Come on in today to enjoy 25% off our yummy food!
I know it looks A-Mazing! Because you own it!
HE KICKED IT IN!
I tried to turn the movie into a sing-along. It didn't go well. Haha. I though the film was great, though. I'm happy I went :)
Great talk this morning!
I would love to go into hospitality and tourism but in this economy it's not realistic.
Jamal Reynolds and Ahmad Carroll think so #$$$$ RT : Love Mike Sherman, but is taking his advice on draft day the right move?
hahaha not funny!
DON’T use cleaning products on or near your natural stone unless the label specifies that it is safe for it.
Developing your own creative expression through foundational drawing w/ Surle Bachman, Ed. S. at The Geezer Gallery
Just went back up. No new followers. Hmm? #thankyoujesus You show 667 to me! /via
We'll see you then!
would it really be worth the mess?
Spark wants to know -- do you remembering your favorite science lesson from #BackInElementarySchool?
wow I wish I was there!!!
Listened to the new album and had to pre-order. I want mine downloaded by the time I get up for work. I feel like a kid again!
75 degree weekend in Denver, but winter will be making an appearance on Tuesday, get ready!
Mother fucker! I accidentally added someone on FB. I hope they don't get notification e-mails cuz no.
Google search results warn of compromised sites | InSecurity Complex - CNET News news.cnet.com/8301-27080_3-2… via
Appreciate it. Didn't get in yesterday. Had ton of vendor orders, food, beer, stuff' so was stuck. & now $950 4 new starter!
RT A friend of mine keeps rescuing horses SE of Dallas. Anyone in the area who wants to come play with them can contact me.
Everyone follow - she's new to Twitter! <3
Strictest security I've seen - Albuquerque, NM & Columbus, OH last year. Not LA or NYC.
RT Welcome , renewing IBN member! She makes tropical-inspired skincare products! Go Daria!
The rainbow is more beautiful than the pot of gold at the end of it because the rainbow is now. - Hugh Prather
It's puppy time now, right? :)
are you coming over?
mememememememe!!! Ive never had the pleasure of playing :(
Happy Birthday to Ben , probably the nicest guy in Alaska. After Santa Claus, of course. ;-)
going to see American Reunion today! :D
Between the GMAT and the StartingBloc Institute I'm missing just about every awesome thing in May. Sigh.
Good Morning!
whenever it is, see ya there. I'll be in the stands this time. Considering the gym size, that's the same as one row away in AC
Matt Cassel should be paying him too. #Chiefs #Patriots : #Ravens extend Bernard Pollard's contract
Omaha is a great place with special character. Where do you live?
Working on some wabbit - stuffed with sage and pistachio sausage
Like her wholee forehead is like two big ol' eye brows.
Why don't you just let the phone ring instead of rejecting my call?
#nw X men origins
or a fork at a restaurant.
Restorative yoga and wine.
Let's celebrate 3 pointers and blocks with...no defense
beta unavailing of mlacommons at next year's MLA in boston
A resourceful person can see opportunity when others only see obstacles." — Garrett Gunderson
want to shoot for sometime after you're back?
I miss you too !
Chase Hackett...One Round At A Time!
Beautiful! Last night's sunset in Albany had such pretty clouds as well.
Sure thing! :)
#Kiski School faces Westtown School tomorrow in the State Quarterfinals. 3:45 pm at Westtown School in West Chester, PA.
Why do I get homework from trig everyday and I won't use it in my life?
okay let me know when you know :) you have my number! I'd love to go with yall
“Your hidden talents are the things you could do that would make you happy, But you don’t know it yet.”
Completed a 5 mi run, and feeling good. And a long-time-lost sensation: extra energy.
...Minion, I reveal nothing. The wait will be a torture you must endure. ....which makes me happy ;-)
At the Parthenon Public Relation Awards...dinner=good :)
"the appetite of our present materialism depends upon stirring up our wants-but not satisfying them" -Robert Lane
The size of a mother's brain increases shortly after childbirth according to market research
Time to get up
A lack of hope can lead to a lack of sense, so holding on to hope can spare you from making some disastrous decisions.
It's a fine morning to sit outside at The 5 Point, and warm up for a day of drinking with a huge breakfast. And a drink or three.
The high destiny of the individual is to serve rather than to rule.-Albert Einstein
I need a vacation.
ya i do,me n'my brother watch it together
LIVE LOVE LAUGH!!!
I emailed then. End of sept is what I got back.
that will show him!
stfu and go shave your fanny :3#
Will do! Thanks!
Guys can only go 7 days without sex and that's only cause we forced ourself to get use to not getn any while ur period is on
Q1: Let’s start with World Book Night. Does anyone have good stories from #WBN?
I saw the midnight showing, I'm paying for it today though haha
#Reds take the series from the cubs!
Note to Russ at channel 3: If you can't confirm 2nd death, don't report it. Try sticking to the facts.
Can't wait! Once I get settled and paid, I'll be out your way to see you and (hopefully spring, maybe summer)
Ughhjj I feel so sick
I swear One Thing is like the cutest video ever. They're all so freaking adorable!
Thx for asking Tonito. It's now posted on our site.
you better leave to come eat!
u want go to Atlanta on the 19th son... Meet sum agents and djs and all ... Hit me up son
Pretty decent day considering I spent a lot of it at work, but now I'm on a mission to relax & get to bed at a reasonable time
Damn feels good to be Back home in phoenix!!!
I actually started with a free one (plenty are available), but most have a time limit on the recordings (like 10-15 min allowed)
Haven't had time to put up listings yet, but check the Ball State and Notre Dame employment pages.
so you did hang up..
I should specify: the show, not the movie. Definitely the show.
:( i dont have a camera!:p
Going to see today! Ready for Chi town?
for sure ill talk it up! My bro and co. are interested! Id be interested in doing a couple shifts, dont need a ticket tho!
enjoy! Have a beer for me. Haha
Lets go Charlie Batch
#DontMessWithBeliebers? What the fuck do you think you're going to do if we mess with you, huh? Throw stickers at us?
fail. You never have it...
#game FOLLOW - New song out in a few days
it's a sad commentary on the evolution of force and the unknown ,it's a sad trend !
If you farted in a nursing home would it make a sound? If it did would you blame it on an old lady?
watching danceing with the stars....
have a good day to
We had there all weekend. Pics soon.
sorry for all the posts.. something happened with the RSS feed. Fixed now.
it's a great book. Hint : Ghostly Romance
Had a leetle Q&A w/ Nick and Justin of A Rocket to the Moon yesterday at Warped! Stay tuned. www.thespotlightwebzine.com
I made this feminist media studies collage with DJ, , , , and and it is seriously awesome!
Thank you ! Excited to see all your lines. So many pretty things in one space!!
cool. did you pick a subject area or just from the whole list of dbs?
basically, the term Hollywood Indies blows my mind. &I'm unpacking it, but I want to make sure the term isn't industry standard
haha the love of my life
Taught my son to ride his bike with no training wheels today.
#MontaEllis is a crazy good!
even thousands of years ago. Talk about your time travel!
Was happy the ride to the airport for NYC started with no sleep till Brooklyn on the radio. Then found out why
LUCCCKYYY. they still go to cali tho. I'd like, make my mom bring me to where they are. Isn't austin performing in LA?
Shooting rockets off with in science
“: #unmanlyconfession I sometimes like wearing fuzzy socks when relaxing on the couch...” seriously Please stop
Going sailing in the San Francisco Bay today with my family :) I am so excited and hope I get to see whales and sea lions :)
what a play wallace. What a play
We are very big fans! Keep up the fantastic work! :-)
no D:
Black-owned businesses: create a FREE business profile today!!
I met Anthony Daniels a few times. He's an interesting character. You can definitely see C3PO in him. Have fun!
we're going to see how good #samsung actually is with their customer service. They will decide if I ever buy their brand again. #fixIt!!!
most opera companies do have a student/under 30 program. Some have success with it. Others keep it on the DL. How to maximize?
I think i'm being coming stupid.
#10factsaboutme I can be really bipolar sometimes
#ThingsPeopleHaveToStopDoing listenin to this weak ass music dey b playin now a days
every guy has that girl who is his weakness
REMINDER: Classes resume on Monday, January 2nd! We look forward to seeing all of you back on campus next week! Happy New Year!
If I swear realty, can I get knighted?
Congrats , heading to the !
I enjoyed Lorax as much as my nephew did.
": well,I'm still here,it didn't erase Me :-)" ok good!! Only 949 to go lol
"yayyy! lets do 50's for time!"
Catching on fast bro. #OsMagic is a term that carries some heavy weight here in the Charm City. Welcome and Good Luck!
yeah...I'm not even going to attempt to disagree. Touche`
oh trust me, I know<3
Creepiest movie experience ever. MT : Since #thePalms movie theater ... has some serious security issues.. I won't be back.
Hi! Tried using online appt scheduler & am having trouble. Are all appts booked this mo?
RT : Today's Navy insult: "You'd screw up a muster on a one-man submarine."
Rivers sucked the life out of them with that 3.
Lunch with the positive coaching alliance!
Hope 's last day of student teaching is going/went well and she enjoyed her not-so-surprise surprise goodbye party!
It's risky to defy pill labels, but instead of 1 #Advil, 2 combined with a large #beer seems to have ended 2 weeks of a bad shoulder
RT RT : I love those random memories that make me smile no matter what is going on in my life right now.
that is exactly why we're best friends. We are attached at the brain. And your the thoughts are mighty dirty.
finally followed me now if I can only get u to follow me
Oh! *blushes* Thank you! :-)
Holy crap so sleepy....
70% of funders evaluating their work, but not always for learning purposes to share with the field
I think I wanna be a tattoo artist!!
how does avon pass some these kids?
no problem
lol pretty girl bad
I don't plan to go for a while (if at all) so you might not even have to write one...
Welcome to Cleveland!!@ Looking forward to a long career here buddy!!
Pujols is hitting a home run tonight...calling it now
Thanks, Keith! And thanks so much for coming to the Idea Forum this morning. It was lots of fun!
Minimal or general to teaching in general - not archaeology specific.
lmfao what songs you want me to quote? lol
Listening to Ira Glass interview Terri Gross. I think I'm in heaven
Avengers time.
Thank you kind sir!
For this last tour he played at the Double Door. But I saw him in a trio at an actual jazz spot downtown (much better).
I will not let fear of failure consume me. I will live out my calling
"a minimal, pulsing synthesizer drumbeat, over which Genesis P-Orridge would declaim lyrics surrounding the concept of discipline"
Also the Espejoa Mini-Dress is amazing. I adore the orange color and flirty shape.
Make it trend NOW:
Have anywhere to go this morning? Fog is heavy! Be careful and drive safely!
lies !!!!! When do yall get outta school
perhaps when asking for my help being specific on the requirements would help
RT : WHY DON'T YOU GO BACK TO YOUR HOME ON WHORE ISLAND? isn't there a whore island here?
Just another #meatless Monday...
On a train, and learning etiquette :)
;I saw your hairflip I saw your short hair I saw your light/dark hair and I will be there until your grey hair belieber F&A♥
I can't wait for the heat vs Thunder rematch in the
Congratulations on your decision to attend Lynchburg College! We will be happy to see you!
thank you !!
isn't stream of consciousness an alternative rhetoric? Should be fine!
How is your husband?
What'd she think man? Did she dig the bearded bard?
Turn your face toward the sun and the shadows will fall behind you. - Maori Proverb -
maybe I should wait to have one of those cupcakes. Might encourage her to stay right where she is at.
All,we do is light it up all night strange clouds ;)
that was - he plays all over with great bands. Give him a shout out!
My fave line so far from "Hands up! Who Wants to Die!" in "He seemed so jolly in his craft, I naturally wished him ill."
I love being on the Montpelier Foundation's mailing list. It makes me feel like James Madison knows who I am.:)
We Philly fans are looking forward to sharing your beautiful soul with you tonight!! Bring it on, sistah!! ♥ See you soon!
finale tonight!!!! who will win? or or #TeamPhiPhi or #team Tie
Don't want to start trouble, but made the newest version of Blackalicious look like rookies tonight.
So you love me?
I commented in the also blog today. Can you fix typos? Everyone should be "every time". Also i should be I. Thanks
no I didn't I'll look now. I'm at the playground ;) I got that job at HBS. Also a call today for an interview for another..
with gas at $4.00 a gallon, NOBODYS riding around and getting nothing. [Read that on here. #clevershit]
I'm going on a set up date with a guy who thinks I'm fat. Good times!
CONGRATS!! wishing you many more! RT : HAPPY ANNIVERSARY LOU & CO!! Today we have been in business for 1 year!
Mad Men Recap: Turn on, Tune in, Drop Out - Huffington Post
Getting off twitter…do not want to see the Barca game updates until I watch it later tonight!
Live Your Dreams.
well damn i guess a lot of people pretending they go to church all the time knowing damn well they just went only for Mothers Day.
well I've never seen anyone else use ijs before...I'm not even convinced other people do that
Season 4 Breaking Bad finale lived up the hype. No poker or new shows tonight, just going to focus on doing some long delayed blog writing.
Think of a number between 0 and 20 Add 32 to it. Multiply by 2. Subtract 1. Now close your eyes. It's dark isn't it?
Had a grand time speaking about story. MT “What a stellar week in Pebble Beach at our Stryve Executive Forum!"
Now Monday, Dec. 26th - an extra day of celebrating for many - we'll keep some holiday music in the mix today.
Right! Sorry my memory was a bit fuzzy...
Lord, Please disconnect me from the "He say, She say". Help me to focus on spreading the Gospel, instead of the Gossip!
Come back soon. I got a new place and at has a kitchen so we can have a potluck dinner
Is it wrong to want an #oscars completely hosted and presented by Muppets?
There are certain things I can't get the point of. Bagels, for instance. Why do people like them? -Ned Rorem
"Analyze what posts your followers RT. It will help u understand the conversations your audience wants to have." at
can I get a follow or a retweet from one of the best SP in the AL?!
Great end to the Jessica Daniels class !! Will miss my 3 week comedy buds
Why don't they ask the others if they'll run 3rd party? They're the ones pretending to be "conservative" & for "limited govt", not Ron Paul
dude im so out of shape for this tryout haha
lipid-soluble drugs are stored by physical solution
#SometimesIWonder if Im the only one who hasn't read a page of the Odyssey yet, but still has a 93 ^_^
My future's so bright, I gotta wear shades.....too bad they broke!
sorry you are going through this but you're helping others too. Will tell my cousin to follow your tweets. thx.
Down low!
I'm going to have to start thanking God daily for the Internet memes the #Obama campaign keep lobbing over the middle of the plate.
Wow, hope we never run into #MelGibson down a dark alley.
Do you use Clear 4G internet? Would you recommend it?
beautiful day for the last day of the orchid fair
Sister, 2 dogs, and I all made it to Placerville safe and sound! Quite the drive from SD. Now time for homeade soup and football!
3rd (of 3) shop rejections, kid got dumped by his usual camping buddy, etc. Trying so hard to stay positive & not get weighed down & surly.
Sometimes I go through the grocery store backwards. Yeah that's right.
Getting up at 630 in the morning and spending 150 on my teeth is not what I call a good time.
108 YA BUDDY!! LET'S GET TO 110!!!!! ~ASHLEY
10 followers because I still don't know how this works
#thatcamposu Propose a lunch discussion group on the whiteboard. Already have one for Libraries and DH.
Let's go bulls!!
nephew? ah you're my son
Jacketman09 WWW.VARSITYJACKETS09.COM WWW.VARSITYJACKETSPITTSBURGH.COM EARN 10$ CASH EACH PAID JACKET REFFERAL FOR YOUR GROUP AZ
I'm too sexy for Facebook.
it's right before you see the skyline of #Minneapolis :)
The Hunger Games has been read. Done. Now for the movie!
lol i actually broke a glass one before too xP
Don't remember the last time a photo shoot wore me out. Body is in pain after last nights session.
And the winner of our #MadeInNY Craft Beer Showcase is....! Congrats you guys!
"Neumeier creates New Orleans not out of large sets but out of dancers." - Arts Education Director on
first time ien seen u brush since January 27
is a dealer program in the future?
If you're in line for party with , they're saying they are only letting 30 more in. Do with that what you will.
Awe did we miss your birthday? Happy belated!
You're on a roll.
Out of the 8 ppl I will be relaying for, Alex is one <3
the jones drew, and the birthday forte
Fuck what I said
yes please!! And love you both!!!
I LOVE YOU AUSTIN. <3
♫ I discovered Kasabian when I was using on my iPhone
go wings!! 20 wins!!
Just got free little caesars pizza because "I am in a cool band." Living the dream.
haah, hmm... what are you gonna fix me ?
Westbury Christian grad Anthony Collins (South Florida) is currently playing Villanova in the Big East tourney 3 points, 3 assists early on
Hit me back ASAP this is the break of a lifetime...you can email me at !
Gathering items for the bake sale!!!
A2/4 Feeling able in the present (self-efficacy), which none can escape, hope, in belief in others and self
Sorry I didn't answer you before. I didn't have a "live" connection for most of the day. #aallfs is the hashtag for the summit.
Follow me on instagram! AntonyFlorida . Goodnight loves 😘
“: I want a relationship where you can lay with each other & just talk.. about anything.”
I know!! I was with clay when I got the email saying you were now following me and we started laughing
RUSSIA HAS THAT TOO BUT IS TARGETING YOUNG WOMEN. HAVE KATHERINE BANG AN ENGINEER FROM THE CITY OF PORTLAND BROADCAST HER SPEECH ABOUT
Happy Birthday beautiful! Hope you had a wonderful day!
lol. I'd tell the Boyz I want to have 69 kids not 7.
- thanks for the RT yesterday! Hope all is well... you at #Drupa?
thank u so much for voting!
Melo: "Maybe I need to not take so many shots. I don't know." This is a start lol.
VCU clinched a NCAA tournament spot with a win over Drexel. Which teams do YOU think are going to win their conference tournaments?
is looking for a way to relax--suggestions?
It’s your #successes that define your right path. Listen to them and they’ll tell you what you’re good at. ~
I see her when I want call that viewers choice
Just preordered Nowhere But Up on my Nook. I'm so excited!!!!
I don't get to watch on Thurs. I only find out later on when I check my DVR & it's empty, because no new show :(
Alright my glamorous entourage out there in twitterland....im officially back in action!! Free hair/makeup//lifetstyle tips are a flowin!!
Stop saying you will give 110% or 120%, it is impossible. Give 100%, 100% of the time!!!
Thank you.
Thank you :)
We're back in action from 3000 Chestnut Avenue! Wahoo!
can't wait to see it! have fun :)
What a wonderful opportunity! I follow Meg on G+ and learn so much from her that way
“Social hierarchy doesn’t hold a candle to the power of feeling isolated in your own skin.” ― Elyse Draper, Freewill
I am in the wonderful city of beloit. Go Snappers!!
I don't sleep. Ever. Hi everyone.
yeah I do .. I was just asking
If you had to choose: Mouth, vagina, or ass for the rest of your life?
Cathal did a great job in round #2 of #SXAccel Fingers crossed for to win! 🍀
Our first "heavy" snow today, about 2-3 inches this morning....WOOHOOO!
Flirting while in a relationship is highly disrespectful & while it may seem harmless...it can be very hurtful to the person that loves you.
Heheh ^^ You'll be fine, believe me & I'll cross my fingers for you xoxo♥
Thank you! Very excited about next season ourselves... :)
Well, it's happened. I'm officially attracted to creepy Glenn from Mad Men.
hey friend! got the shoes @ nordstrom! on sale, too!
Be who you are and say what you feel because those who mind don’t matter and those who matter don’t mind. ~Dr Seuss
👎had severe toothache & found out I cracked a tooth, which is resulting in a root canal & crown next week. 😰 kill me now.
& i'm probably buying a Trent Richardson jersey the first day they hit the store.
any questions i can give u the answer
I miss you
Musburger... "the Red River Rivalry is turning in to a Red River blood bath". Love it!
my prob is that I remember my dreams, but they are all so boring! Just everyday events. I want some excitement/craziness
Why would you block them?
Amtrak is superior to planes in so many ways. However, other people's loud cell phone conversations remind me nothing is perfect.
tnks for sharing
The Hotel Derek appreciates you! Returning guest should ask about the special rates and inclusions.
he doesn't even have a twitter account does he? I assume if he did Bollig or Sharpie would have told us
Disembodied El train voice, what do you consider "suspicious activity" exactly?
:) RT : It's 4/14. You know what that means. Happy everyone!
Noel Gallagher will be BACK in Oasis for the next album people. The band is KNOWN for it's dueling brothers. SERIOUSLY.
time. Let's do this!
ohh cool mom knows ?
ok. i don't feel like debating lol.
i was going to have a movie night on my ONE free night off for this week and maybe next, but now i dont wanna watch anything else
>: Wikipedia is successful because they consistently build rich content on a persistent URL, of value in link economy.
It's 's sweet 16 today! Please wish her a happy birthday!69
Aint got to many friends circle is turnin into a triangle
girls with dimples >>>
Glad you posted to the ND forum. Will be interesting to learn more about museums.
When you have a lot of anyone's money on the line, you must ask the cost of avoiding vs. recovering from various kinds of "bus accidents".
Shout out to who just jnd twttr. Awsme bb and good guy. He will hv some ctchg up 2 do with tweets
Aw. Thank you. I have to see what's on those pages now.
I dunno, but nope.
Tell us what you are thankful for!
The thing that is making jazz healthy today is that people are coming out of other backgrounds - from rock, folk, ethnic music Billy Taylor
#Top100Lies I don't have a Facebook anymore.
:) 3> lol my backward heart ;p
you don't know how to fish
Why I be seeing ugly bitchess with a bombb ass Niggahs *smh not right
Looking forward to another week of Champions League Football!
Thanks for the follows!
My friend, who is Black & gay, thinks Obama's support for gay marriage will hurt his reelection effort. My friend is 55 yo & very religious.
#keepyourpantson we've only just began the heavy petting.
wish you guys would come back to Memphis!
Lake Calhoun all summer...? I think so! :)
If you think you want to be down, you've been warned
I got grounded :/
What if we've got it backwards? Maybe mustaches have a thing for pedophiles.
Packing up my dorm doesn't get any less depressing year to year
Thanks for the shout out!
I've got some time to spend with family, and then back to writing when all goes quiet once more. Revisions are so much fun.
Don't have wheels, either; I take the Metro-North. But we're 'sold out.' Who'd think everyone would want to go to prison? ;-)
#ThingsTwitterDoesntCareAbout , yo Grandmas Mommas best friend's aunt Betty's cat died.
In Beaune for 2 days! Drank a 2007 Chorey les Beaune from Tollot yesterday night. Went from good to magnificent in 30 min. I am a happy man!
It most definitely was. Hope everything at Club Albee is going great!
#youngkidsshouldbebannedfrom Disney World, LegoLand, and Six Flags. Those are only for adults now.
My friday night is complete. Thanks Austin.
I comment but no feuding here. Too cool for that.
Was just thinking about how I can do my part when i visit the beach this summer...cleaning up, NOT driving on the beach
credits only apply to new invoices - we'll contact you via support to discuss other options.
my girlfriend is cheating on me with a fighter, I bet I could whip his ass
Good luck!! :D RT : Interview tomorrow at monicals @ 4:30. I'm.PRAYING I get the job so I can leave my current one
The NY Times report that young people are watching more video online and less on TV. Will TV's be things of the past? Hmm.
I had no idea this many people were on a "random quote basis" with Miss Congeniality.
Some people think what we do isn't cool..so, do you want to be cool, or do you want to be rich?
He read your tweet and then went left. He would make a good Democrat.
You're amazingly cute :)
Reason why I need a car: I can go anywhere. Reason why I need a job: My own money!
if you aint there you aint nowhere!!!
I wil forever be one patriotic SOB. #MUR-CA #RedWhite&Blue
don't tell me happy mother's day. that's disrespectful.
hope you feel better!
Indeed! Thank you!
sounds fun. ENJOY!!
Were finally dating hahah
"Saying you're happy isn't the same as being happy."
I'm gonna say yes!
#DemonicDerek Fear is always near watch your back watch every corner you turn hahaha
Good morning and welcome to Chicago! RT : Breakfast burrito from ! Life is good.
Well get ready for another wild day
Getting excited to enjoy complex scenarios & live in the moment for tmrw's sesh w/ . . .
made the song #Boyfriend just for me!jelous ? JK
Support the artists performing at the Vintage Reggae Winter Fest and buy their music legally. Keep reggae alive!!
firehouse everyday!
Believe it or not, some folks here in #Milwaukee, WI, just felt an
I'd give you a great tip, though! ;)
Ha! Took my lunch break early for a rescheduled haircut :)
Is one more important when meaningless without the other? :) RT : "Imagination is more important than knowledge..." Einstein
Greg Osby should be performing on Channel 5 right about now! Check it out.
I've been rooting for the Capitals since the 70s. I'm a Maryland gal! BTW - I also like the Washington Nationals too!
Do you know how you want to be mad, but you can't be... Becuase things make sense ? Curse you logic !
Come in and check out our huge selection of 7 For All Mankind jeans!
#FF to everybody who's cool now let me enjoyed my holiday #420 thanx :-)
More than any other factor, vision affects the choices we make and the way we spend our time.
About to eat a Hot Pocket which is weird because I had no idea I was suicidal.
:( Sending prayers your way.
I wonder if USC professors have Twitters...
Not sleepy yet!
that is one of my top five all-time favorite covers.
NO MORE WHEELS' BIRTHDAY CRAP!.
Q2: What jobs not directly in #preservation are good ones for preservationists to consider?
"I dont care if the whole world collapsed around us; as long as we’re together I'll be fine."
Who We Scrappin?
software stabilization, for those of us that cant hold still
well, I can give it a try.... thanks....
God bless you as well, have a great day and life. InshaAllah
Yeah, I'd definitely have to have a pool if I live there. Swimming cools me for the entire day. :-)
We are hitting the studio to demo a few new songs in 2 weeks! Can't wait.
To love is one thing, to be loved is other thing, but to be loved by the one you love is everything.
#FF new followers thanks for the follow-much appreciated
"Free but snazzy" tool for making video tutorials: Jing. Raquel says hardest part of the tutorial she made was script writing.
So uhh... #giants won...and um...FUCK YEAH!
Game changer! Bring in Ronnie!!
Blustery 100 degree heat in liveable Austin. Hahaha. That's a laugh. Why are you idiots still moving here to join us idiots?
on that
I think there were more people at the gas station at 6am this morning than there are people who live in Potsdam.
Thanks guys! RT : Smokin' Hot Aces Mash Up Mondays featuring DJ Jeffery Thomas & special guests spinning rock & roll mash ups
We'd like to take a moment to remember all the victims of 9/11.
Is it just me? I can't see you racing today. What is your schedule? Thanks.
CUT THE CHECK
#night twitter 💤
Last day to get a FREE tall beverage when you buy a pound of Starbucks Tribute Blend or Starbucks VIA Tribute Blend!
do you go all the way to the top at Runyon?
That's two game 6s now decided by free throws in last seconds.
I can't hear you my eyes are closed.
#DanceMomsMiami is on good byyeee :-p
BOOKED ALASKA!
Planning a Wedding? Come talk to us at the #SLCBridalMall today and Saturday! #BridalBash Great Giveaways happening!
Follow our producer!
#LuckyTaco contains REAL luck of the Irish! The Irish folk turned into tacos weren't lucky
My senior year better be crazy.
“: #SorryNotSorry :P” haha. Definitely not sorry!
so maybe the finale made me a little misty-eyed. but i'm pretty sure it's just allergies.
Lately I've been feeling so sexy I'm gonna start walking like Giselle everywhere I go!!!!
playing the cheaper course but I've heard good things.
Homesick. For the first time in years that's not been induced by media or a missed event. Send the Black Hawk for a quick Sydney visit pls.
Q4 How can I keep myself focused on my #smallbiz goals?
S.Casper: "Just sent cast very rough first draft. So rough they should wear gloves while handling for fear of splinters."
“: dipping fries in a chocolate frosty >”  so good!
Congrats to all speakers and volunteers for an incredibly inspirational event!
Guests of Fox News of all things.
An attitude of gratitude creates blessings. Help yourself by helping others. You have the most powerful weapons on earth- love and prayer.
Bitch Ain gone detox
hey jeannie! yep, facial hair pendulum has swung the other way. :) how are you all doing?
Looking forward to #AAAEPHX conference tremendously!
Congrats, dude! i find myself in TN a bit since my wife from there. maybe i'll u one of these days.
-- well deserved!
I am listening to music!!!! Good to see you too
I declare the iOS Newstand to be the most useless icon in the history of the GUI
Another great photo shoot today, cold as heaven though! :)
How is it possible to feel this great? Looking forward to today and what it brings!
Dear Jesus, you died for our sins. You died for us. We love you. Thank you so much for everything you've done. You're amazing. :)
We will have live commentary from Adam Borders in LA at GLAAD Media Awards Use hastag
Rocket Power my nigga.
right this very second here at , Tony Peebles is about to blow the roof off this bitch. come help us hold it down.
Jus changed my profile pic but it made me look way darker than I am. *shrugs* oh well
ah, thats how works! thanks! .
y u mad sweetie???
I had no idea that was an actual term.
So quick bright things come to confusion
Education's purpose is to replace an empty mind with an open one
Or, conversely, something built into the study of English (in my experience) on the college/graduate level that makes you a liberal?
Dancing, sampling, smelling the flowers but not taking the TIME to develop a system that leads to successful investing????? Success = system
Whitney's phone is dead but we're just leaving !
a lethal combo! RT : I need some ice cream cake and Tommy Wiseau! BELCH
I'm a little worried about being able to stay up that late...I'm like 80 years old these days.
That motorcycle just went by my extremely fast
RT “A brand is no longer what we tell the consumer it is – it is what consumers tell each other it is.” - Scott Cook
Follow Back ?
Prosecutor in #Zimmerman case was horrendous today; has he ever questionned a #witness before??? #whoa he was bad.
Thanks! You too, enjoy the sunshine!
Have you gotten an attagirl product recently? Post a pic of you in your gear and get a coupon code for your next purchase!
Getting Dessed because my aunt is addicted to the mall
why do you care if asks Belichick tough questions? Its not like a journalist will make Pats defense better.
Just posted my 2011 tour dates on my website. Also appearing with former KORN guitarist "Head" in Kentucky on August 28th. All on Facebook
Kicking off Hope Hall's senior picture week with a shoot at 7:00!
so glad she's out !!
Secret practice session on an empty stage somewhere in Huntsville! Find me if you can and win a free slurpie!! ;)
Trying a new approach to removing myself from French-Canadian mailing lists: Replying in French with "S'il vous plaît, arretez maintenant."
what the crap are you saying
Fly higher. Birds if a feather...
Anytime bro. Let me know when its good for you and we can work something out. The track is gonna be mixed ridiculously.
Devon Bookert to Florida State
Thomas Carlyle A good general not only sees the way to victory; he also knows when victory is impossible
so heart broken over the David Ortiz news. He is my favorite player.
I helped a local chapter association decorate a homelss shelter for kids 12-17. I hope they find something to smile about.
The Cedars social... St. Ann's... Venturing out tonight! Great girls night!
Oh right! Thanks for reminding me. I need to take photos of the work I did. That might not be for a few more weeks.
HAPPY BIRTHDAY LUHAN !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! YOU'RE JUST THE CUTEST THING EVER!
the weekend goes by too fast
mimba.tv making great progress :) Audio module almost ready for public beta!
Now just needs to get connected with and that would be fucking awesome.
I finally completed Max interval training!!!!
Quest labs reported an alarming jump in positive heroin tests in the workplace. Quest used an oral test that was more accurate.
I believe you can be a starter bro. You've got the talent and you're a true cowboy. Let's fucken go!
bro find out so we can go all out when you get here
Merry Christmas!
thanks for playin both!! Nice move!!
Please send our congrats!! So happy to have her! RT My daughter has been accepted! Transferring from UK this fall.
AIl I heard was good music, gainseville and beer. SOLD
Pretend you're Molly Ringwald with her binto box of sushi
Damn it sucks to be a marlins fan
Not sure what it is about the days of awe and the Hagim, but I am so chronologically displaced these days~ apologizes
That cartoon completely tacky & shows that people are continuing to slander Sandra Fluke.
Happy Easter everyone! Hope you enjoy some craft brews with dinner. By the way Troegenator goes great with Ham!
listen to music slight work on repeAt
Nat' Director Lee Miller's oldest sister suffered a dual brain aneurysm yesterday & had immediate surgery. Please them in your prayers.
bitch ass mother fucker.
For the beer guys and gals out there we now have collaborative effort with Chef Morimoto. Both the Black and regular Soba Ale.
For real??
I blame Joe Block
I'm on my way in now. I'll search for him and treat him with the utmost respect.
so follow me back so i can dm u please .
writing out the charts for my gospel class next month @ TheCollective.....POOF!!!!!
will computer catch-up work from holidays ever end?
Thanks for being our fan! Which model do you have?
Thanks for falling asleep on me, now I'll just read a book.
Life boats--"well judgeing by the trajectury of the sun and the moon I would say at the bottom of the ocean I bit lots of holes in them :)"
Couldn't make it to the game due to the snow but SO proud of my team. You all played like the Western Conference Champs you are!
Heat not a distance runner's friend - 80s tomorrow in Boston
On my way to the Lower Eastern Shore Heritage Council Annual Meeting and Awards luncheon!
thanks! You are coming?
He's so disgusting.
Not necessarily, but she's loved in this house. Name is Old Norse, means "rebirth" or "new day."
she's good at that. I need to call her. struggling with something
Made it to Austin an hour or two ago. What a rush! On the bus back to Houston.
Seriously? They won't eat quinoa?
Crush a bit, lil bit, roll it up, take a hit & f*ck the bullsh*t
#LiveGive im back thought my kiddo was cryin!
That wasn't a home run. Would have hit top of wall. Probably a double.
Everyone from Alvarez to Sweeney say they were shocked by the allegations.
Planning a #Thanksgiving meal? Traveling for the holidays? Remember to use your Kroger Gift Card when shopping or at Shell for gas
follow back?
Richard Jefferson: Out Saturday with Knee Injury
!! > RT : Another great Christmas with family in the books! Now the countdown to at for NYE!
Hollywood Undead. Fit for rivals. Flyleaf. Green Day. Three days grace. Emery. Deadmau5. Skrillex. Pendulu. The prodigy. Tyga. Eminem.
A dragonfly has a lifespan of 24 hours.
sourpuss..I'll say it for them..Good morning
Warm weather + last day of #SpringBreak = screaming #neighborhood kids.
This time Misty tweeted arbitrary, dictatorial, domineering, and imperious architecture, sculpture, painting, and poetry
Cooking up dinner & dessert with my girls
If Twitter and Facebook merge - Twacebook. What wabbit?
can't wait to meet you!
My baby mommas momma loves me..
Writing a paper on sex offenders and watched 's "Our America" as a reference. She is an inspiring interviewer!
you've earned your name here with that amazing collection of tunes!
the pace is picking up now that it's getting closer.
Waiting on my Mare to deliver Foal. Was carrying twins. Fingers Crossed. One in ten thousand Successful births. Snowing in KC now.
perfect weather to #slide:))
On 4/1? That could be lots of fun. RT : do it up tonight! Our #ADDYs is next Friday in
I don't wanna get up...
yes, tomorrow! it's on my calendar :D
You're welcome Charlie. You rock!
Which preorder are you stacking your pennies for this week? #radiohead #thekingoflimbs or #thestrokes #angles ?
that i know. i don't support them. I can't stop admiring the courage of YSR. Atleast TRS didn't dare overact under his rule
Exactly Can you imagine how little NHL they'd actually show if ESPN had the contract? Not to mention the piece.
Hang in there Deion. Your being tested. It will all be brought under the light. Stay strong!
Issue has been resolved with picture uploads! Apologies for the inconvenience!
Just 3 more hours to go
#SanDiego ladies get at me for #beerpong party!! Contact my team to enter the tournament.
Will someone brush my teeth for me so I can go to bed?
NO IM PROUD OF WHERE I CAME FROM..jk kay
Just lettin' you folks know that the stores that sold out of the vinyl are now restocked.
My kingdom for strong coffee right now. Damn sleep fairies let me down again.
IN THE THEATER OH MY GOD. FREAKING OUT HERE.
Wow is this for real? Lebrob hitting clutch shots? Holy fuck. The world is ending. Hahagaga
yeah Vin you really need to get going on that surprise hahahah
#RAZRMAXX Extra battery life? I'd paint the town MAXXimum red without stopping to juice up!
Had a gud day things r lookin up improving everydau
Mr. Smith is dressed like a hippy!! He looks funny!
Just got so pumped about taking my brother to see his favorite band, RHCP, this June as a grad present- too bad he'll be in Italy. 💩 poop.
were you at?
Yeah cuz these chicks need your help
So excited about my new mixtape. Today I am taking the time to promote it in the streets. I hope its not to wet outside..
Over-stimulation can cause #insomnia. Take away all distractions from the bedroom & practice aromatherapy to create a peaceful environment.
OKAY RT : "Let me show you how your pussy works!"
House Party Tip: Make sure you know EVERYONE who comes into your house, and have someone stand at the door to control who enters
I'mma laugh in my kitchen. And then make some chorizo and eggs with lots of cheese. And a pitcher of mimosas.
Fact: Pizza tastes better (and has fewer calories) when you share the "bones" with your dogs.
bring me cats and I'll let you take the couch! No job just school for me now. An internship will hopefully appear soon!
I <3 puma
Let the #leftovers begin!
Cool :P
YES IT SHOULD.
Oh my God, I want to get an iPhone now just for this case!
everything on this episode> 😂
Gotta love Hofer. Such a good guy :)
Day #1: Three coffees, soda, a giant red bull and blood pressure fairly normal...
Lmao!! That was genius! ;)
Don't miss Spring Awakening! Use promotional code "BELIEVE" to get 40% off tonight's show! unmtickets.com
damn the dancers on abdc are good af
hee, it's like a snuff photo. You're next, buddy! Have you tried their cherry porter? it's not portery at all, but is great.
Huh. Where does one buy steel-toed boots? needs them by tomorrow, so can't be online...Kohl's? Home Depot?
More people die from food poisoning, starvation & obesity than tornadoes, tsunamis & earthquakes. God takes better care of us than we do.
Wish I was jst doing photography full time. It's gonna happen by this next year. Thats a promise to myself & everyone who reads this! Lol
How r u a libertarian? Against gay marriage & ppl's rights but 4 expanding govt w/ full time salary positions. Makes no sense
Thanks to Willy's Mexicana Grill & Mellow Mushroom of Brookhaven for providing Open Arms dinner tonight.
This is probably stupid to everyone else but tomorrow is 5 months with
I've been getting every red light.
are you @ the bus stop ??
tell me about it sheesh RT: already bored of this whole summer nothing to do thing"
so mr sawa, do u believe in ghosts?? ever wanted to go on a ghost hunt??
Triton Report: Diving, Volleyball and More - San Clemente Times
Lol I know you do! I'll keep you posted so you can get urself a flight out here :)
Trust me, he will.
your tweets today,as usual, have cracked me up!
thanks aubrey!
What is needed, for progress to be made is the move based on the error. -Lewsis Thomas, The Medusa and the Snail.
Derrick Rose may return in early Feburary.
I love garlic fries. Also, I am vampire-proof. Go #SFGiants!
oh I'm sure it was - gotta love Monday mornings
LOL.. RT I hope Ron Artest starts a brawl in the Denver audience tonight.
Doesn't cover lost handsets, does it?
so much disaster research focuses on planning and mitigation but overlooks the human side of preparedness and recovery
The entire #Memphis airport smells like BBQ
where at?
... i'm not surprised haha! You and your Squatch watchers lol
Working on a mini stock pile of goods!! Just in case...
For you? Any time.
Congrats to and all my TinT friends for the N'Awleans marathon!
my mom tryna get me fired and take my job
geeking out on the new macbook pro =) any necessary apps i should get down on?
Be safe!!
i got alot on my mind about 12,798,676 things running through my mind right now
haha well lets hope so!
Practice tonight and not in the mood for the little kids energy -__-
Happy Repeal Day! On this day in 1933, Americans were able to purchase alcohol legally for the first time in 13 years. Cheers!
Thought: My life is chronicled on the internet. dA has poetry from when I was 13, fb has all of college, LJ has middle and high school...
Aw yeah! Gotta love #dubstep ♥
she rollin weed and she don't even smoke
Congrats if u guessed Charbonneau- enjoy $10 driving! (4 the record, we also think there should be a car named "on a beach run", )
Yup...watching the #bucks clinch a playoff spot.
1 hour delay due to dining car issue taking longer :-( conversations in lounge getting louder & irritating - need my roomette
Brody moving on to the Anti-Design Festival - created in reaction against the "if it won't sell it won't get made" mindset
hahaha! That would happen in our house, too!
Noah's Ark spotted traveling down I-5...Bruce has dry days in forecast....yeah!
how is the 30th?
Session Available! Gas Works Park - Friday, September 16th between 10am - 3pm. This is a TFCD photo shoot. You decide the wardrobe.
READ MY BIO FOR A FOLLOW BACK
I am just starting my own blog and could use some advice on content and getting people to actually read it! Keep in touch!
HUGE SHOW ON FRIDAY!!! Come out!
doing laundry...oh joy...Not!!!
Who's going to be the new coach. @ Binghamton , wow what timing....
Congratulations Jesmyn Ward (symposium 2009) whose novel Salvage the Bones comes out this month.
I'm a big fan of people () who really know what they're talking about!
"There are persons who, when they cease to shock us, cease to interest us."
that's definitely true
slide through like a nigga need a big cup of some lean nina on my hip hit a nigga in his spleen
"Many Waters/Many Floods" is only $4.99 on iTunes. If you have any friends looking for new music, tell them to pick it up.
no that's actually how it goes...
have a great day
Whos line is it anyway and catching up with > sleeping
In history, trying to study for Spanish. Twitter keeps interrupting me!
chillen brozay - same ol grind - sup with you?
Eco design pioneer Barbara Dornbush speaking June 17 11:30AM at Verde Home in Westside. Topic: Stylish green choices: A french perspective.
Ima MSG you my number
Yup...I would have benched Wade last night too. There was no point in having him on that court last night.
Looking forward to officially welcoming BYU & Tulsa tonight at our Team Announcement Party!
People who tweet about their every move. "I just took 20 steps. I'm hungry. I just poured myself some 2% milk." TAKE A BREAK!!!
idk yet but I'll let I know
We have a winner! Thanks for playing our third anniversary trivia. #OpFeed RT : Carrots, potatoes and onions?
The thoughtful came home with a SBux hot chocolate & Valentines cookie for me. So thankful for him & the little things. <333
RT : Nuggets join Thunder in teams interesting in Grizz center Hasheem Thabeet, sources say.
RT : If you're not dreaming bigger today you're getting smaller today.
Just found a hacky sack in my closet. Made my fuckin day lmao
ok thanks
Thank You Sir
and the weather is great for your special day!
Hit Mike Jones up on the low / cause Mike Jones about to blow! RT 281-330-8004
Made it back to LA!! Big shout out to all our new friends and fans made along the way! U all made this Tour a great success! See u soon
Topics I can live without over the next month: 1. Penn State 2. Laurent Robinson Q's! 3. Jackie Battle Q's
Final book manuscript submitted to publisher! Woot Woot!
she a creep unfollow her
Why pre-draft for Network? CBS not trying to promo ABC (ESPN), they want to capitalize on buzz & leverage reps
I feel that with passion. Follow back
#i hate when bitches talk shit but cant back it up
With and and the rest of the choir heading to River Gate Mall:)) We got a Superior trophy;)
Ugh JLo next week? It'll be like Madonna week all over again, one crew will get the only good song.
I know that LA people can't just sit by the Silver Lake Reservoir all day every day. Know that I am doing it for you, and you're welcome.
Homeless guy to nobody: "shut your mouth kid before I GD f you up." Me: "damn right."
thanks for the RTs!
To study abroad for +10g's or not to study abroad for +10g's
And the Ruby on Rails book by Patrick Lenz is great too. I have it open on my desk right now.
The awkmoment when your walking and texting and you see someone's shadow in the corner of your eye and you FLIPOUT just from being startled!
Cut me a check!!!!
- I Loved You in "Happythankyoumoreplease", and look forward to seeing more great work from you!
This is how I feel...
except that he runs slower than a baby crawls
Working until 8, then 11-2, spending time with Melissa before back to work for 10
“In developed countries, there is a burgeoning interest in teaching healthcare management,” says Herzlinger a Harvard Business School
HA! More like a stick of gum. :D I didn't invest though. ;)
Small victory: adding an item to our "Manuscript of the Month" page in Cold fusion!
“: Its a Secret Society All We Ask is Trust...” & Loyalty
Please DM me whom I should be aware of? ty
You my nigga but u gotta stop tryna violate Wade and bron lol
I'm finally over you.........I wish
I swear I think about #Success everyday
omg was it your 18th birthday???
Cristiano Ronaldo scores again in the final minute to make it Madrid 4 -1 CSKA Moscow
so ive got an 80% for my presentation not what i expected but hm not bad....
and I'm eating a breakfast sandwich and CHIPS!!
TY for the #FF mention and for being such a great supporter of your B!
Hello. Milwaukee starting to warm up. Rainy today.
Why didn't he layup with his left hand?
Game7. Our House. Bring your whiney ass Neil.
Luck been on my side real talk
Hey, I'd uh, take offense to that... if it weren't true.
One occupy member just offered council member dan besse a packet of grass seed to fix city hall lawn after they leave.
Oops loan
pssssht. Amateurs. I usually just burn mine in the barrel in my back yard.
glad they could figure it out for you! Sorry about that!
Rondo gettin up there and then he got swatted haha
Philharmonic last night, class with The Savvy Actor today! It is going to be a great weekend.
that's so sad!!
Okay Thursday, I'm sufficiently now caffeinated. Let's do this.
Super! We have a song on our to do list called Shaman!
Peyton I'm pretty sure they need another white boy..
watching the baseball game, eh? good move. btw, my Wings also lost today so I'm not happy either...
Hi! Quick question: how long does it take to un-suspend a Twitter acct? Sent ticket yesterday. Thnx!
can take you
Warning: this is hard (at least me being a guy) to watch.
save me some passsssghetttttttti!!!!!!
*hugs and prayers* for both of you.
thanks for the follow Danny.
Excited to tour Hoffman York with , , , ,
mdlbphyc Thanks for the RTs about the National Transition Conference.
#music (: Her songs are so inspiring<3
i hope everybody had a great easter !!!!! :-)
Glad you like Online Check-In. We appreciate your business.
I had to scrub off my makeup with a washcloth tonight cause I 4got my makeup remover at 's D; My face hurts now.
NEXT SHOW: Rookie of the Year w/ Mechanical Kids, Juneau, & Tyler Herrick! December 21st at Coffee House in downtown Madison!
I been listening to born and raised all day such a great album
You have another hour and 13 minutes to adjust you attitude today! ATTITUDE ADJUSTMENT HOUR: 3-6 TUE-SAT $1.00 off all drinks -1/2 off apps!
let's meet for an interview for in LA message me
nigga I was there lol the one with like 10 vending machine right ?
Austin is one of the nicest people. He just has the biggest heart.
just used my giftcard! Thanks so much!
Had a great time at the Downward Dog with some fellow librarians
omgawd it like everyday i hve to read on fcbk ''Well , Good Morning Cuties ; ) ♥'' like u say tha everyday '' Well buenos dia CABRON'' -_-
The odds of me watching #Americasgottalent is about the same as becoming a #bears fan
Joyeux Bastille Day! Get over here and enjoy our all day happy hour.
watching giuliana and bill and all this cancer talk is hitting so close to home.
Phoenix Marketing International joins other #financial services firms as a corporate sponsor for Oct 24th Network 4 a Cause
Cub's baby is two-ah!!
Sitting at a desk all day can cause lower and upper back and neck pain, hip pain, poor balance, and make you more prone to heart disease
Damn I forget about midterms everytime!
Nets done in NJ, ending a lifetime of ignoring them despite living 15 minutes from the stadium. Will have to take subway to ignore them now.
Are you coming out to your alma mater for a game this year? Better see you out here for OU game next yr
If it was easy, everyone would do it
I should have just RT'd everything SGR said.
wtf happened to twitter
well that's great!!!!!! lol
American Born Chinese by Gene Yang // Laugh-out-loud funny, inventive, plays with stereotypes & multiculturalism. Damn good!
Use Code RUSHPRINT for 10% discount on all printing @ www.Rushflyerprinting.com
Going home tomorrow to Vancouver, WA for a brief engagement. March 10 is my birthday and it's my granpa's too.
Sometimes I like to go onto Yahoo answers and let young teenagers know that you can't get pregnant if the girl is on top.
What! That sounds like the best kind of trip.
Heyy! How was the pool? I ended up catching up with an old friend today.
So long as you're still the same person I feel for, my feelings will never change.
Kid at on the border tried to show a fake Id, his downfall? Wearing a "coppell high school class of 2011" hoodie. Smh...
Momma's day is tomorrow. Do something nice for
Happy birthday T Gwynn, and many more!
You suck now
What do you mean?
Getting a LOT of callers asking about the circumference of the hot tamale bowl :( sorry, guys and gals.
All the luck in da world in the #BetterWithUTour! Love ya.
Q.) What's the difference between a writer and a 12=slice pizza? A.) A 12-slice pizza can feed a family of four.
Uhm Wow!.. you look Fantastic! :D ..just had to say that again:)
Getting the heart and the mind on the same page is a challenge; the heart, the mind AND the body? A hopeless cause.
Shut up Jon, I'm gonna come over there and kick your ass! I have been snorting cocaine and doing bicep curls all day to prepare
lol im just used to long walks, I guess. The heat isn't gonna be pleasant though
Know what's good? Marinate hot dogs in beer, then coat w/cornbread batter, then fry.
At the end of drinks my boss shakes my hand. ".. Breast Cancer" I realize it was money, slaps me, "Don't argue, just do it. Good luck."
watching your song Calling All The Monster nice video
Its called a brush
yup im pregnant cause i wear hoddies everyday. NO, shut the fuck up. stay outta my life. FUCK RUMORS,
you should call me on skype
Shit, just as I thought you had mother fucking changed, you throw this in my face. Douche Bag, get hit by a fucking bus.!
Can officially say follows me!!!!
We continue to strive for excellence in everything we do
omg really!!! Cool!
It's hard to say if there is any value in the direct message service of Twitter.. ::contemplates::
I suppose its totally coincidental that I repotted my plants on #EarthDay?
Thanks for the RT's! Hope you're having a great Monday.
Need to get my twitter game up
It appears that Gene Simmons and Shannon Tweed are now officially married. I hope he doesn't cheat on her.
The are moving to the AL West in 2013!! Can't tell if that'll help or not? Probably not!
maybe u have the wrong flavor tea LMAO! what up fam
;) RT : Sometimes all you need is a little to pump you up in the morning.
The game is on TV in #PDX! Thank the baby Jesus in his tiny little manger. Go Halos!
A dog is the only thing on earth that loves you more than you love yourself. Josh Billings
with my favorite colombian girl !
A tent equal sleep not no damn Cons Chey if that's the case why are we still together!!
no no no not yet, that's just to record in Atlanta
Thank you suzette!
I think you ask both "How did you feel" artists should be able to get feedback don't need ask if it "works"
Wow, Believe You Can!
oh. Keep scrolling. beautiful! What a treasure.
thank u sir
Oh yea!! Me and got that DosEquis on deck
and there's the popular you tube video "black and Jewish" sung to the same tune!!
a lot of people are, it seems like its just a crap shoot right now, keep checking in and shouting
doesn't matter you're there so its caliente ;D
Teacup pigs are out. It's all about pygmy goats. -
Thanks for the follow...got some dope tees!
Omg it is so friking hot out right now
Hey funny woman. Look forward to seeing you on Sunday!
The best feeling in the world! “: I'm a mommy! Calla Marjorie was born at 11:01am. She is in my arms now. Photos later!”
RT : He who has tact has less to retract.
Being filled with the presence of God give you energy that no cup of coffee or healthy meal can give you!
RT Feels like the most crowded a Super Bowl city has been on a Tuesday.. Can't imagine what I'll be like Friday, Saturday, Sun
Girl you know they random as hell...this was yesterday as I was wlkn to the dollar store ...lol
How is it when you take two people who are in love and make them one in marriage that the whole is greater than the parts?
The Real [FAKE] Housewives of Mexico City: It's the greatest spin-off show never conceived ... "The Real Housewives of Mexico City" -...
love this!
My first opportunity to post this but our auditions (Misty and I) were sent off earlier today for Army Wives. *fingers crossed*
laugh when I do something funny... Like get drunk enough to think about voting for
A best friend should love you like a mother, protect you like a father, talk to you like a sister, and fight with you like a brother.♥
lol really? :O
Loving tonight's thoughts from & Great mix of perspective, hope, anger & defiance. Is it tomorrow yet?
Beat his ass Puck.
Everything is going to be different this year...
Still in shock over that goal call. Regardless, big win. #NYR #NYY keep winning.
The lion that roars in the MGM logo is named Volney.
Oh, never mind, just on my Hootsuite. Weird.
Thank you!
Ha are from the West Side too!
First full day in my new house in Orlando!!!!! I love it so much!!!!!! So big! I love my mom, she has done so much for me!!! <3 u mom!!!
it will be great. Look for me in the movie.
Yep he stopped by work to give them to me. You don't get any!!!! ;)
Since you're sharing, video later? YouTube? YouP...?
#RavenNation is just devastated today...we all love Sizzle and we are looking at anything to boost morale
All that mammal gland stuff must have a whale of a mammalian attraction. This came to me in a flash!
#duh,winning xD
Newt dropping out Tuesday? That's $280000 more in Secret Service protection from taxpayers. Thanks Mr fiscal conservative.
Im Done Dealing with Certain Individuals
Thanks. That doesn't count the two invites I've already gotten and the two I went to in April.
Here's to peace and comfort to those in reflective mourning today; those touched personally and those with national spirit!
We're on our way to District 38 in New Jersey to do one last push before Election Day!
Social media causes what is referred to as FOMO -- The fear of missing out
Close by - Grafton!
I would really like to see Dane Cook in a pair of Chuck Norris Action Jeans.
If I take time out of my schedule for u...then ur pretty important
Taking a few hours to just chill out. It's so important to nourish yourself even when you think that there's no time.
oh yeah true
"Voldemort's mouth looks like my grandma after she takes her dentures out..." ROTFLMAO.
Singh/Pepsi: "Currently little incentive for brands/agencies to plan via agile mktg. Requires transparency"
Shower,then bed!!(: don't want to go to school tomorrow!/:
what? where?
Continue to help us raise initial funds, buy raffle tickets, now...$1!!!! All funding has come from Coleman and Grayson's personal accounts
Tks for the follow.
any time. Ha
Lord i give myself away so you can use me
umm , did just call you !
I wake up & check NBA.com and I see that Deron Williams has been traded to the Nets. Is this real life?
Happy new year
u said load
Writing new tunes!
Yep, sorry guys! Stickam isn't loading. We'll try to be back soon!
at 1st u weren't my fav but I have 2 say u were right abt every1 & r so strong , def love u now ! And of course :)
preach it
lol yea that shit is true we fucked niggas up for real. Those was the good ol days lol
. is stoked! RT Great lineup for Data Business Meetup tonight! in the house!
even tho you give me headaches 😁 I still love you 💜
we could of had it all... well, maybe 75 percent.
eating fast food and processed food is usually more expensive than making your own.
Play them one of our songs..... That will say it all ;)
done and done!
following #startupriot on twitter. looking for interesting companies, people, etc. any recommendations?
Don't b fake and you will find that someone
its early. my hormones jumping off the walls right now at work
Not right now thought
Loaded Coronas? Lol
I know but keep trying
Bye-bye Twitter. Hello Facebook! ^.^
Mike was the man
totally with you on that one! Boo
and In the morning, i conquer
Me and Kyle Frazier boutta paint Lubbock red!
I'll talk to the head honcho (Mr. D) tomorrow and see what he thinks!
Bubba Watson's shot was amazing, one of thet best shots to go down in history to win
yeah. But hey ima go to sleep bro. Have goodnight. Peace
I am an intern. I've been at goddard since 08. What project do you work on? I work on giovanni @ the ges disc
That was the type of 3rd quarter that was the trademark of the 2008 Celtics.
HELP THIS MAN OUT!
Thanks Josh! We're pumped. It's going to be a big year. Psyched to have you involved to get it right.
you like them too! woo woo
Oh boy <3
So my friend Justin is asking why you liked his comment. There's a very convoluted discussion about this right now...
I can feel the ocean breeze through the screen.
Michael Jackson
good luck with your race!
Way to go, #DrStevenZeitels at , for saving 's voice. 's singers are so lucky to have you!
Ha! Yes! That totally makes me want to like your page!
#why is there a bird in our class room.?!(;
Finally! Two down at once. Nap time!
That's a hot dress.
T-minus 2 days for ICTC's Class of 2014 application deadline!!
We appreciate all the love!
V.I.P poppin' bottles do it B.I.G
I Cried When Will Smith had to kill his dog in I Am Legend
No but I hope to soon - how is it? :D Looks beautiful!
A BIG Happy Birthday to my best buddy have a great one
Gorgeous photo!!!
We must accept finite disappointment, but we must never lose infinite hope
Working with the awesome crew today for an shoot! Stay tuned for more details when we launch in May!
I hate to break it to you...but we took that turn a LONG time ago
Offended? I took it as a compliment.
wow -- that didn't even make sense to me. how did nyjer get home so fast?
I wish i can have a evil alian cat(:
I wonder is there a street dude that's crazy enough to buy the Bently Truck! Dam! somebody's are going to pull it! i might SMH!
Going to chill at Adrianas casa tonight. I haven't seen my bff in forever lol
Good Luck Golden Bulls
Benefit Concert for Japan on 03/22, 7PM @ PSU Lincoln Hall. Free Admission, donations accepted for Mercy Corps. Ft. Portland Taiko & More!
Thanks! We'll check you guys out next time we need some furniture!
#MLB Baseball team Cincinnati Reds staying at Mayflower hotel in Farragut North #DC - playing #Nationals tomorrow night.
Anybody have any good cherry recipes to share?
Jack will be the counselor of the week, every week. I can't wait to visit you in NYC the Boston to NYC is cheap!
Gabe told me not to give up so I wnt
Opportunity+Setbacks+Perseverance=Success
Conquered the commuter bus today.
Blatant shoulder-to-head hit by Giroux. He'll be getting a call from Shanahan, definitely.
Do Yall Know What Spot In Bham Got The MayWeather Fight Going Tomoro Night?????
Keep away from people who try to belittle your ambitions. Small people always do that. ~Mark Twain
That takes some dedication to start writing at 19 like that! What is your HBO pilot in the works?
I love my kids so much. For them, I would lie, cheat, steal, or kill. Except the last 4.
im workinnnn on it
not saying I agree or disagree, this is what Bo has said about transferring in the past.
ha! Not this weekend...
Watching The Lion King <3 <3
Beers on the screened-in-porch.
actually we can hook up b4 the reception bc all my work must be up by July 1st! Thx 4 the support!
I loved the first season, can't wait for the next!
#Tebow to GreenBay? We do need a Running Back ha ha. But seriously can you imagine how good he could become under #Rodgers Tutelage?
What country leads one to be Moluccan?
Perhaps there's a reason beyond being upset that he's transferring. Then again, perhaps not.
ha! Reason prevails :-)
"Memory is a way of holding on to the things you love, The things you are, the things you never want to lose."
hahahha smokings bad for you anyway!
We are workin' on it Jeremy! Hope to have it to our OH moonshiners by Summer 2012! Shine responsibly!
I'm single but I'm always giving my friend's relationships advice.
this paper needs to write it self because me mind no longer wants to!
Edward Lewis at #sdsms says that he feels Facebook is dead compared to Twitter... What do you think? Rt to let us know...
We should trend something for Ariana. Any ideas?♥
Every time the Rabbi said the word God today, I kept wanting to yell "Name Of The Creator!" Seriously.
"We are all here for some special reason. Stop being a prisoner of your past. Become the architect of your future." -Robin Sharma via NP
8.6 on the richter scale is a big earthquake
New Follower heyy boy hey
It's not "misuse" of language if in a writer's voice, to their purpose
yeah. I don't know if I should avoid the area when I move or put it at the top of the list.
Blah going to bed.
Nathan Ryan<3 follow me?(:
#nowfollowing ..... follow back
We are real people. :P Also, now that all the videos are uploaded, feel free to check it out!
Sitting here watching the playoffs....
I know! Im just so....SO JEALOUS!!... I wish you could get his autograph for me if he was there this year!
Roll Out Of Bed Perfect... So I Know It's Real;)
Yea, get that color bro females feel it!! I got a fresh ass shirt that color!!
"Education is when you read the fine print; experience is what you get when you don't." Pete Seeger
Wise & knowledgeable people never define themselves by the accoutrements, trappings, or characteristics of a particular social class!
he's clearly better than last year how can that be disappointing?
Ah better write me back )':
dunno s nole looks very sharp. Pico is in some deep doodoo I think.
Sorry about that! Pls try my other tweet: "Life's Insatiable Hunger..."
If these homophobic politicians really wanted to protect marriage they would fight against divorce rather than gay marriage.
Santorum Runs From Record on Fannie, Freddie Housing Goals
Theres a person on instagram pretending to b Niall saying he is dating this girl. I just want to RIP THEIR FACE OFF! Posers are my
Was momentarily excited to see a new primetime show with ted allen until I realized that it was actually tim allen
Dump her on her head, bro.....
I really like the Weary Traveler. Nice to be back in Madison.
yay I'm sick of seeing and hearing one direction and I don't even like one direction either
Love life,engage in it,give it all you've got. Love it with a passion,because life truly does give back,many times over,what you put into it
#iowa picks corn, #new hampshire picks
Want to be inspired? Go to an art museum or art gallery. Then just look. Take your time. Prepare to be inspired!
Impromptu Tuesday night fun night water
Are you looking in a specific area of SEA? We're not part of RW but we'd love to have you!
why aren't you famous yet??
Social media will fade into a seamless integration of communication tools embedded around us.
And I'm just a toy to you.
Although lacking defense this #RoseBowl game is much more interesting than LSU-Bama round one. That game was an SEC stinker.
<3 the quote you emphasized: “the problem the player is asked to solve should be difficult, interesting, & even addicting.”
yes please! Thanks!
Top marketing word "smart!" Goggle it and see how smart I am!
I hate after drawing for over an hour ... I reaffirm with myself that I don't like my "style"... Try again tomorrow :/
Can you come to the event tonight? #GGHH tonight! 's! see you soon!
not exactly an "upgrade" RT : Life's been a blur this year, but didn't I just upgrade to Firefox 4 a few weeks ago?
Tell your hubby that I know he's been sleeping in Satan's bed.
I'm done with football lol
it was amazing to sleep for 11 hours :)
ah, f'real! lotsa blackbeard in my diet recently, and just found the dope janet kay LP on saturday
Phil Collins comes on the moment I enter this thrift store.
Thanks! RT : ..... Wishing you all best as you start your #Whole30!
New twitter account :) will be beginning to use this more :)
happy mothers day everyone!
I love it. Especially when you check in on that bridge. And b/c I like knowing where you are at all times.
we're happy that you're excited! :)
very well played sir!!! He will be a raider in a year
Even death is not to be feared by one who has lived wisely.~Buddha
If the don't have a "closer" then what do you call ?
After sex tell your girlfriend you got your baby mama pregnant
: At least we agree on the Yanks! :)
Forget Groundhog Day tomorrow, I declare today Giraffe Day and spring is here in B-TOWN!
Thanks for the good rec to tweet about our use of biodegradable corn-based forks at tonight's class mtg.
everyone keeps saying that ctfu but i love it!! Its my new tat idea!!!!!
Time for me to get back to my to do list! ;) What new goal / task have you set for yourself this week?
Reading Eliot's "Four Quartets" in memory of Theo Angelopoulos. "In my end is my beginning."
Screw the law we just some mother fukkin kids.
#YouWannaImpressMe respect Justin Bieber and I'll be impressed alright ;)
Just because it's 4:20 somewhere
Happy birthday
Setting goals includes determining your dream or vision. What do you want more than anything else? Now let's see how to get it!
55% of people yawn within 5 minutes of seeing someone else yawn. Reading about yawning makes most people yawn. #odd facts
At Books-A-Million :)
No worries there- I can send you the file. Are you PC, OS X or Linux?
Austin convention center evacuated?? Anybody know what's going on?
seriously? You switch 88 DTC channel to the 17 for the last restart? WTF?
It is a cool product : - presenting at #webinno - offers a better UX for teachers for virtual education.
#seetheworld let's do this people! Get a passport and let's go!
don't know. I would think at least 8:30 or 9...You coming?
me too, they're so interesting
Requring shared root to manage accnts and not allowing read only accnts to change pw is
First night in #Denver was off the chain!!! It's gonna be a GREAT weekend here at the Improv!!
Everyday is a new beginning stay away from what might have been and look at what can be.
New CandySwipe FREE game comment in the #android market: "I love this game." by Verneshia
If you give up...You may miss out on the best part of your life.
I'm the Brahmin, call me daddy,
I want to meet ceaser millaaaan!!!!!
Not gonna lie I'm lovin this rental ford focus hatchback
I want a guy to come swoop me off my feet who likes to take random trips on the weekend by just surprising me and saying "baby lets go...."
Yes, sorry about that! It's the 22nd.
you've been following and RT a lot of people so I an gonna give it a shot..follow me??
no problem babe lol
I DID!
You thought that was gonna work?
So disappointed with my pizza last night! The Montague’s All Meat Marvel was more like a Sparsely Placed Meat Failure!
Or ever, haha.
You know you're bad at bowling when you get called out by the girl cleaning up
oh yeah. I don't even like people my age. They be lame af. Haha
George Steinbrenner died of a massive heart attack today? Should the Yankees stay in Anaheim to play or go back to NY??
#BadCauldronSongIdeas Barracuda by Heart? That'd be a helluva stretch.
big red is teaching our class
please me and my daughters want this More Than This tweet could ever say :)
Make sure to follow us on twitter
Thanks! We're always working on making it better. RT : very impressed so far! Well done.
I'll be in TC remember???
Anne, you are a serious twitterer
I'm new to Twitter. So I'm starting another business. I'm getting everything ready today.
rather, follow me real quick so I can shoot you a DM pretty plz
Took a midnight walk to the site of JFK's 1963 Peace Speech. Great place to think and reflect
Hey, if you guys are ever in need of a graphic designer who loves Mars and Science I'm your man :)
Yeah im omw now
it's Friday!!
So Tomorrow is 11/11/11, will you do anything to mark that "milestone" ... buy a lotto ticket maybe?
Now offering Wallet Sized LAMINATED Auto Insurance ID cards 4 existing clients! Just send a request 2 if u want one!
Best part of #Superbowl46 was that not everyone was mad at Bradshaw for not sitting on the 1yd line. Bryant had to be estatic!!
Looks like ima need get on some birth control when my boo get out.
#yobitv makes up songs all the time. We have no idea when he's actually serious about a song being a song.
follow me and ill follow u back but only if u like austin mahone one direction and us tin bieber
See you all at MP Saturday. 204, row 4 S 25. Come visit
Anyone gotta Xbox 360 and play mw3 :)?
RT #Quote Do not fear death, fear the unlived life. -Natalie Babbitt
Truth gets higher ratings than fiction! I have some unbelievable true crime stories to share!
In Carlton bldg. Student: Do you know where Duke 108 is? Wanted to say: In the Duke building. Didn't.
RT : "#BFPG just hit 305 members. Who says that functional programming isn't practical, real or interesting!" <- Nice work!
Learning new things about my industry is inspiring and energizing!
I guess the universe has a sick sense of humor. Go Pats!
I love your Style and share your love of Lia Sophia!
You are welcome. :-)
not too awesome: getting up at 4:15 to get your long run in before work. pretty awesome: finishing the back 7 in sub-9:00 pace.
You bet!
If you insist on using Papyrus in your presentation, I will spend your entire presentation evaluating your use of Papyrus.
Strongly agreed!
#TEAMFOLLOWBACK Why isn't #TweetingDuringSex a super hot trend on here b/c I thought for SURE it would be. SO LET'S MAKE IT! RETWEET!
I'm not a hipster, I'm saved.
Technically this is the encore of that performance. Most Rush shows are 3-5 years long, including non-musical interludes.
Congrats to #UDHoops Soph forward, Joe Stephens on being selected All-SCAC Honorable Mention!
Hey Boyes, great game today! Timing.... not really your thing?
@ the hotel with my close homies n UP in BK blowingg it down just maccin shout out to them wrd
Goodnight world. DB loves you.
Yea Lebron doesnt play like he wants it. Like he used to.
Thanks for sharing about Johnny. I wish him the best, even after all the mistakes. So sad to see his talent go unused.
When I was single i'd have 2 buy a new 4-pack of toilet paper once a month. Married, its about every 5 days.
I'm a little uncomfortable writing this, but I do cringe at the thought of what Mitt might have done to his dog if it was gay.
Can't wait to start drinking tonight while watching Role Models.
Old and slow guys bunting = Brewers 2012! Catch the fever......
Here @ the US Open bout 2 wch the men, Djokovic vs Petzschner
yup double but I'll be off early tonight like 8.
I'm late lol....wat it do tho stranger?.
Yay, both boys are napping! MOMMY TIME!
Be nice to see yall festival again. You killed it a few years ago! Hope all is well and keep rockin
Rob Lowe in "Knife Fight" is a near perfect blend of Sam Seaborn and Chris from "Parks and Rec." He literally says "lit-terally."
hair at night: lets be beautiful and shit. Hair during day: you go there, you stand up, you curl, you go opposite direction, you look frizzy
Loved having you beautful ladies join us!
I'm so depressed. I don't know if I'll b teaching at my school next yr. A whole generation of changemakers lost. U suck
RT : Young The Giant at Party In The Park? I can get behind that
Dovestech has submitted its cloud-based data processing proposal to the Department of Defense (Navy) for a three month review.
who is?
I have supported Lugar for the past 24 years and I considered giving Mourdock my support
I wish you the best...
yep and back at it again.
Good morning friends! I hope you're doing well :) Swing by #SUBWAY for lunch and turn a good day into a great day!
Will u be my hunky Jesus?
Even your parents lol
This weekend >>> I can feel it already
just wait lol your getting it.
The invisible hand of the marketplace jerks off aristocrats until they finally die in the midst of self-love.
's icon is life.
we just had one a few weeks back....hopefully we will be back soon! wish you the best yo
Colombia is with an 'o'...“: We now ship to 4 countries in South America (fist pump). Please welcome Columbia to the Stunner Family”
#GutsiestMovesYouCanMake Giving a cat a bath.
Coffee after 5 was a TERRIBLE idea.
