	TIMON OF ATHENS



	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


TIMON	of Athens.


LUCIUS	|
	|
LUCULLUS	|  flattering lords.
	|
SEMPRONIUS	|


VENTIDIUS	one of Timon's false friends.

ALCIBIADES	an Athenian captain.

APEMANTUS	a churlish philosopher.

FLAVIUS	steward to Timon.

	Poet, Painter, Jeweller, and Merchant. (Poet:)
	(Painter:)
	(Jeweller:)
	(Merchant:)

	An old Athenian. (Old Athenian:)


FLAMINIUS	|
	|
LUCILIUS	|  servants to Timon.
	|
SERVILIUS	|


CAPHIS	|
	|
PHILOTUS	|
	|
TITUS	|
	|  servants to Timon's creditors.
LUCIUS	|
	|
HORTENSIUS	|
	|
And others	|


	A Page. (Page:)

	A Fool. (Fool:)

	Three Strangers.
	(First Stranger:)
	(Second Stranger:)
	(Third Stranger:)


PHRYNIA	|
	|  mistresses to Alcibiades.
TIMANDRA	|


	Cupid and Amazons in the mask. (Cupid:)

	Other Lords, Senators, Officers, Soldiers,
	Banditti, and Attendants.
	(First Lord:)
	(Second Lord:)
	(Third Lord:)
	(Fourth Lord:)
	(Senator:)
	(First Senator:)
	(Second Senator:)
	(Third Senator:)
	(Soldier:)
	(First Bandit:)
	(Second Bandit:)
	(Third Bandit:)
	(Messenger:)
	(Servant:)
	(First Servant:)
	(Second Servant:)
	(Third Servant:)
	(Varro's First Servant:)
	(Varro's Second Servant:)
	(Lucilius' Servant:)


SCENE	Athens, and the neighbouring woods.




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT I



SCENE I	Athens. A hall in Timon's house.


	[Enter Poet, Painter, Jeweller, Merchant, and
	others, at several doors]

Poet	Good day, sir.

Painter	                  I am glad you're well.

Poet	I have not seen you long: how goes the world?

Painter	It wears, sir, as it grows.

Poet	Ay, that's well known:
	But what particular rarity? what strange,
	Which manifold record not matches? See,
	Magic of bounty! all these spirits thy power
	Hath conjured to attend. I know the merchant.

Painter	I know them both; th' other's a jeweller.

Merchant	O, 'tis a worthy lord.

Jeweller	Nay, that's most fix'd.

Merchant	A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were,
	To an untirable and continuate goodness:
	He passes.

Jeweller:	I have a jewel here--

Merchant	O, pray, let's see't: for the Lord Timon, sir?

Jeweller:	If he will touch the estimate: but, for that--

Poet	[Reciting to himself]  'When we for recompense have
	praised the vile,
	It stains the glory in that happy verse
	Which aptly sings the good.'

Merchant	'Tis a good form.

	[Looking at the jewel]

Jeweller	And rich: here is a water, look ye.

Painter	You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedication
	To the great lord.

Poet	                  A thing slipp'd idly from me.
	Our poesy is as a gum, which oozes
	From whence 'tis nourish'd: the fire i' the flint
	Shows not till it be struck; our gentle flame
	Provokes itself and like the current flies
	Each bound it chafes. What have you there?

Painter	A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?

Poet	Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.
	Let's see your piece.

Painter	'Tis a good piece.

Poet	So 'tis: this comes off well and excellent.

Painter	Indifferent.

Poet	                  Admirable: how this grace
	Speaks his own standing! what a mental power
	This eye shoots forth! how big imagination
	Moves in this lip! to the dumbness of the gesture
	One might interpret.

Painter	It is a pretty mocking of the life.
	Here is a touch; is't good?

Poet	I will say of it,
	It tutors nature: artificial strife
	Lives in these touches, livelier than life.

	[Enter certain Senators, and pass over]

Painter	How this lord is follow'd!

Poet	The senators of Athens: happy man!

Painter	Look, more!

Poet	You see this confluence, this great flood
	of visitors.
	I have, in this rough work, shaped out a man,
	Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug
	With amplest entertainment: my free drift
	Halts not particularly, but moves itself
	In a wide sea of wax: no levell'd malice
	Infects one comma in the course I hold;
	But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,
	Leaving no tract behind.

Painter	How shall I understand you?

Poet	I will unbolt to you.
	You see how all conditions, how all minds,
	As well of glib and slippery creatures as
	Of grave and austere quality, tender down
	Their services to Lord Timon: his large fortune
	Upon his good and gracious nature hanging
	Subdues and properties to his love and tendance
	All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glass-faced flatterer
	To Apemantus, that few things loves better
	Than to abhor himself: even he drops down
	The knee before him, and returns in peace
	Most rich in Timon's nod.

Painter	I saw them speak together.

Poet	Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill
	Feign'd Fortune to be throned: the base o' the mount
	Is rank'd with all deserts, all kind of natures,
	That labour on the bosom of this sphere
	To propagate their states: amongst them all,
	Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fix'd,
	One do I personate of Lord Timon's frame,
	Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her;
	Whose present grace to present slaves and servants
	Translates his rivals.

Painter	'Tis conceived to scope.
	This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,
	With one man beckon'd from the rest below,
	Bowing his head against the sleepy mount
	To climb his happiness, would be well express'd
	In our condition.

Poet	                  Nay, sir, but hear me on.
	All those which were his fellows but of late,
	Some better than his value, on the moment
	Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,
	Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,
	Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him
	Drink the free air.

Painter	Ay, marry, what of these?

Poet	When Fortune in her shift and change of mood
	Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants
	Which labour'd after him to the mountain's top
	Even on their knees and hands, let him slip down,
	Not one accompanying his declining foot.

Painter	'Tis common:
	A thousand moral paintings I can show
	That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune's
	More pregnantly than words. Yet you do well
	To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen
	The foot above the head.

	[Trumpets sound. Enter TIMON, addressing himself
	courteously to every suitor; a Messenger from
	VENTIDIUS talking with him; LUCILIUS and other
	servants following]

TIMON	Imprison'd is he, say you?

Messenger	Ay, my good lord: five talents is his debt,
	His means most short, his creditors most strait:
	Your honourable letter he desires
	To those have shut him up; which failing,
	Periods his comfort.

TIMON	Noble Ventidius! Well;
	I am not of that feather to shake off
	My friend when he must need me. I do know him
	A gentleman that well deserves a help:
	Which he shall have: I'll pay the debt,
	and free him.

Messenger	Your lordship ever binds him.

TIMON	Commend me to him: I will send his ransom;
	And being enfranchised, bid him come to me.
	'Tis not enough to help the feeble up,
	But to support him after. Fare you well.

Messenger	All happiness to your honour!

	[Exit]

	[Enter an old Athenian]

Old Athenian	Lord Timon, hear me speak.

TIMON	Freely, good father.

Old Athenian	Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.

TIMON	I have so: what of him?

Old Athenian	Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.

TIMON	Attends he here, or no? Lucilius!

LUCILIUS	Here, at your lordship's service.

Old Athenian	This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature,
	By night frequents my house. I am a man
	That from my first have been inclined to thrift;
	And my estate deserves an heir more raised
	Than one which holds a trencher.

TIMON	Well; what further?

Old Athenian	One only daughter have I, no kin else,
	On whom I may confer what I have got:
	The maid is fair, o' the youngest for a bride,
	And I have bred her at my dearest cost
	In qualities of the best. This man of thine
	Attempts her love: I prithee, noble lord,
	Join with me to forbid him her resort;
	Myself have spoke in vain.

TIMON	The man is honest.

Old Athenian	Therefore he will be, Timon:
	His honesty rewards him in itself;
	It must not bear my daughter.

TIMON	Does she love him?

Old Athenian	She is young and apt:
	Our own precedent passions do instruct us
	What levity's in youth.

TIMON	[To LUCILIUS]           Love you the maid?

LUCILIUS	Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.

Old Athenian	If in her marriage my consent be missing,
	I call the gods to witness, I will choose
	Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world,
	And dispossess her all.

TIMON	How shall she be endow'd,
	if she be mated with an equal husband?

Old Athenian	Three talents on the present; in future, all.

TIMON	This gentleman of mine hath served me long:
	To build his fortune I will strain a little,
	For 'tis a bond in men. Give him thy daughter:
	What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise,
	And make him weigh with her.

Old Athenian	Most noble lord,
	Pawn me to this your honour, she is his.

TIMON	My hand to thee; mine honour on my promise.

LUCILIUS	Humbly I thank your lordship: never may
	The state or fortune fall into my keeping,
	Which is not owed to you!

	[Exeunt LUCILIUS and Old Athenian]

Poet	Vouchsafe my labour, and long live your lordship!

TIMON	I thank you; you shall hear from me anon:
	Go not away. What have you there, my friend?

Painter	A piece of painting, which I do beseech
	Your lordship to accept.

TIMON	Painting is welcome.
	The painting is almost the natural man;
	or since dishonour traffics with man's nature,
	He is but outside: these pencill'd figures are
	Even such as they give out. I like your work;
	And you shall find I like it: wait attendance
	Till you hear further from me.

Painter	The gods preserve ye!

TIMON	Well fare you, gentleman: give me your hand;
	We must needs dine together. Sir, your jewel
	Hath suffer'd under praise.

Jeweller	What, my lord! dispraise?

TIMON	A more satiety of commendations.
	If I should pay you for't as 'tis extoll'd,
	It would unclew me quite.

Jeweller	My lord, 'tis rated
	As those which sell would give: but you well know,
	Things of like value differing in the owners
	Are prized by their masters: believe't, dear lord,
	You mend the jewel by the wearing it.

TIMON	Well mock'd.

Merchant	No, my good lord; he speaks the common tongue,
	Which all men speak with him.

TIMON	Look, who comes here: will you be chid?

	[Enter APEMANTUS]

Jeweller: We'll bear, with your lordship.

Merchant	He'll spare none.

TIMON	Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus!

APEMANTUS	Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow;
	When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.

TIMON	Why dost thou call them knaves? thou know'st them not.

APEMANTUS	Are they not Athenians?

TIMON	Yes.

APEMANTUS	Then I repent not.

Jeweller: You know me, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS	Thou know'st I do: I call'd thee by thy name.

TIMON	Thou art proud, Apemantus.

APEMANTUS	Of nothing so much as that I am not like Timon.

TIMON	Whither art going?

APEMANTUS	To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.

TIMON	That's a deed thou'lt die for.

APEMANTUS	Right, if doing nothing be death by the law.

TIMON	How likest thou this picture, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS	The best, for the innocence.

TIMON	Wrought he not well that painted it?

APEMANTUS	He wrought better that made the painter; and yet
	he's but a filthy piece of work.

Painter	You're a dog.

APEMANTUS	Thy mother's of my generation: what's she, if I be a dog?

TIMON	Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS	No; I eat not lords.

TIMON	An thou shouldst, thou 'ldst anger ladies.

APEMANTUS	O, they eat lords; so they come by great bellies.

TIMON	That's a lascivious apprehension.

APEMANTUS	So thou apprehendest it: take it for thy labour.

TIMON	How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS	Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cost a
	man a doit.

TIMON	What dost thou think 'tis worth?

APEMANTUS	Not worth my thinking. How now, poet!

Poet	How now, philosopher!

APEMANTUS	Thou liest.

Poet	Art not one?

APEMANTUS	Yes.

Poet	Then I lie not.

APEMANTUS	Art not a poet?

Poet	Yes.

APEMANTUS	Then thou liest: look in thy last work, where thou
	hast feigned him a worthy fellow.

Poet	That's not feigned; he is so.

APEMANTUS	Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy
	labour: he that loves to be flattered is worthy o'
	the flatterer. Heavens, that I were a lord!

TIMON	What wouldst do then, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS	E'en as Apemantus does now; hate a lord with my heart.

TIMON	What, thyself?

APEMANTUS	Ay.

TIMON	Wherefore?

APEMANTUS	That I had no angry wit to be a lord.
	Art not thou a merchant?

Merchant	Ay, Apemantus.

APEMANTUS	Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!

Merchant	If traffic do it, the gods do it.

APEMANTUS	Traffic's thy god; and thy god confound thee!

	[Trumpet sounds. Enter a Messenger]

TIMON	What trumpet's that?

Messenger	'Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse,
	All of companionship.

TIMON	Pray, entertain them; give them guide to us.

	[Exeunt some Attendants]

	You must needs dine with me: go not you hence
	Till I have thank'd you: when dinner's done,
	Show me this piece. I am joyful of your sights.

	[Enter ALCIBIADES, with the rest]

	Most welcome, sir!

APEMANTUS	                  So, so, there!
	Aches contract and starve your supple joints!
	That there should be small love 'mongst these
	sweet knaves,
	And all this courtesy! The strain of man's bred out
	Into baboon and monkey.

ALCIBIADES	Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed
	Most hungerly on your sight.

TIMON	Right welcome, sir!
	Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous time
	In different pleasures. Pray you, let us in.

	[Exeunt all except APEMANTUS]

	[Enter two Lords]

First Lord	What time o' day is't, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS	Time to be honest.

First Lord	That time serves still.

APEMANTUS	The more accursed thou, that still omitt'st it.

Second Lord	Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast?

APEMANTUS	Ay, to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.

Second Lord	Fare thee well, fare thee well.

APEMANTUS	Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.

Second Lord	Why, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS	Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to
	give thee none.

First Lord	Hang thyself!

APEMANTUS	No, I will do nothing at thy bidding: make thy
	requests to thy friend.

Second Lord	Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee hence!

APEMANTUS	I will fly, like a dog, the heels o' the ass.

	[Exit]

First Lord	He's opposite to humanity. Come, shall we in,
	And taste Lord Timon's bounty? he outgoes
	The very heart of kindness.

Second Lord	He pours it out; Plutus, the god of gold,
	Is but his steward: no meed, but he repays
	Sevenfold above itself; no gift to him,
	But breeds the giver a return exceeding
	All use of quittance.

First Lord	The noblest mind he carries
	That ever govern'd man.

Second Lord	Long may he live in fortunes! Shall we in?

First Lord	I'll keep you company.

	[Exeunt]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT I



SCENE II	A banqueting-room in Timon's house.


	[Hautboys playing loud music. A great banquet
	served in; FLAVIUS and others attending; then enter
	TIMON, ALCIBIADES, Lords, Senators, and VENTIDIUS.
	Then comes, dropping, after all, APEMANTUS,
	discontentedly, like himself]

VENTIDIUS	Most honour'd Timon,
	It hath pleased the gods to remember my father's age,
	And call him to long peace.
	He is gone happy, and has left me rich:
	Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound
	To your free heart, I do return those talents,
	Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help
	I derived liberty.

TIMON	                  O, by no means,
	Honest Ventidius; you mistake my love:
	I gave it freely ever; and there's none
	Can truly say he gives, if he receives:
	If our betters play at that game, we must not dare
	To imitate them; faults that are rich are fair.

VENTIDIUS	A noble spirit!

TIMON	                  Nay, my lords,

	[They all stand ceremoniously looking on TIMON]

	Ceremony was but devised at first
	To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,
	Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown;
	But where there is true friendship, there needs none.
	Pray, sit; more welcome are ye to my fortunes
	Than my fortunes to me.

	[They sit]

First Lord	My lord, we always have confess'd it.

APEMANTUS	Ho, ho, confess'd it! hang'd it, have you not?

TIMON	O, Apemantus, you are welcome.

APEMANTUS	No;
	You shall not make me welcome:
	I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.

TIMON	Fie, thou'rt a churl; ye've got a humour there
	Does not become a man: 'tis much to blame.
	They say, my lords, 'ira furor brevis est;' but yond
	man is ever angry. Go, let him have a table by
	himself, for he does neither affect company, nor is
	he fit for't, indeed.

APEMANTUS	Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon: I come to
	observe; I give thee warning on't.

TIMON	I take no heed of thee; thou'rt an Athenian,
	therefore welcome: I myself would have no power;
	prithee, let my meat make thee silent.

APEMANTUS	I scorn thy meat; 'twould choke me, for I should
	ne'er flatter thee. O you gods, what a number of
	men eat Timon, and he sees 'em not! It grieves me
	to see so many dip their meat in one man's blood;
	and all the madness is, he cheers them up too.
	I wonder men dare trust themselves with men:
	Methinks they should invite them without knives;
	Good for their meat, and safer for their lives.
	There's much example for't; the fellow that sits
	next him now, parts bread with him, pledges the
	breath of him in a divided draught, is the readiest
	man to kill him: 't has been proved. If I were a
	huge man, I should fear to drink at meals;
	Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes:
	Great men should drink with harness on their throats.

TIMON	My lord, in heart; and let the health go round.

Second Lord	Let it flow this way, my good lord.

APEMANTUS	Flow this way! A brave fellow! he keeps his tides
	well. Those healths will make thee and thy state
	look ill, Timon. Here's that which is too weak to
	be a sinner, honest water, which ne'er left man i' the mire:
	This and my food are equals; there's no odds:
	Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.

	Apemantus' grace.

	Immortal gods, I crave no pelf;
	I pray for no man but myself:
	Grant I may never prove so fond,
	To trust man on his oath or bond;
	Or a harlot, for her weeping;
	Or a dog, that seems a-sleeping:
	Or a keeper with my freedom;
	Or my friends, if I should need 'em.
	Amen. So fall to't:
	Rich men sin, and I eat root.

	[Eats and drinks]

	Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!

TIMON	Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.

ALCIBIADES	My heart is ever at your service, my lord.

TIMON	You had rather be at a breakfast of enemies than a
	dinner of friends.

ALCIBIADES	So the were bleeding-new, my lord, there's no meat
	like 'em: I could wish my best friend at such a feast.

APEMANTUS	Would all those fatterers were thine enemies then,
	that then thou mightst kill 'em and bid me to 'em!

First Lord	Might we but have that happiness, my lord, that you
	would once use our hearts, whereby we might express
	some part of our zeals, we should think ourselves
	for ever perfect.

TIMON	O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods
	themselves have provided that I shall have much help
	from you: how had you been my friends else? why
	have you that charitable title from thousands, did
	not you chiefly belong to my heart? I have told
	more of you to myself than you can with modesty
	speak in your own behalf; and thus far I confirm
	you. O you gods, think I, what need we have any
	friends, if we should ne'er have need of 'em? they
	were the most needless creatures living, should we
	ne'er have use for 'em, and would most resemble
	sweet instruments hung up in cases that keep their
	sounds to themselves. Why, I have often wished
	myself poorer, that I might come nearer to you. We
	are born to do benefits: and what better or
	properer can we can our own than the riches of our
	friends? O, what a precious comfort 'tis, to have
	so many, like brothers, commanding one another's
	fortunes! O joy, e'en made away ere 't can be born!
	Mine eyes cannot hold out water, methinks: to
	forget their faults, I drink to you.

APEMANTUS	Thou weepest to make them drink, Timon.

Second Lord	Joy had the like conception in our eyes
	And at that instant like a babe sprung up.

APEMANTUS	Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.

Third Lord	I promise you, my lord, you moved me much.

APEMANTUS	Much!

	[Tucket, within]

TIMON	What means that trump?

	[Enter a Servant]

		 How now?

Servant	Please you, my lord, there are certain
	ladies most desirous of admittance.

TIMON	Ladies! what are their wills?

Servant	There comes with them a forerunner, my lord, which
	bears that office, to signify their pleasures.

TIMON	I pray, let them be admitted.

	[Enter Cupid]

Cupid	Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all
	That of his bounties taste! The five best senses
	Acknowledge thee their patron; and come freely
	To gratulate thy plenteous bosom: th' ear,
	Taste, touch and smell, pleased from thy tale rise;
	They only now come but to feast thine eyes.

TIMON	They're welcome all; let 'em have kind admittance:
	Music, make their welcome!

	[Exit Cupid]

First Lord	You see, my lord, how ample you're beloved.

	[Music. Re-enter Cupid with a mask of Ladies
	as Amazons, with lutes in their hands,
	dancing and playing]

APEMANTUS	Hoy-day, what a sweep of vanity comes this way!
	They dance! they are mad women.
	Like madness is the glory of this life.
	As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
	We make ourselves fools, to disport ourselves;
	And spend our flatteries, to drink those men
	Upon whose age we void it up again,
	With poisonous spite and envy.
	Who lives that's not depraved or depraves?
	Who dies, that bears not one spurn to their graves
	Of their friends' gift?
	I should fear those that dance before me now
	Would one day stamp upon me: 't has been done;
	Men shut their doors against a setting sun.

	[The Lords rise from table, with much adoring of
	TIMON; and to show their loves, each singles out an
	Amazon, and all dance, men with women, a lofty
	strain or two to the hautboys, and cease]

TIMON	You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,
	Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
	Which was not half so beautiful and kind;
	You have added worth unto 't and lustre,
	And entertain'd me with mine own device;
	I am to thank you for 't.

First Lady	My lord, you take us even at the best.

APEMANTUS	'Faith, for the worst is filthy; and would not hold
	taking, I doubt me.

TIMON	Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you:
	Please you to dispose yourselves.

All Ladies	Most thankfully, my lord.

	[Exeunt Cupid and Ladies]

TIMON	Flavius.

FLAVIUS	My lord?

TIMON	       The little casket bring me hither.

FLAVIUS	Yes, my lord. More jewels yet!
	There is no crossing him in 's humour;

	[Aside]

	Else I should tell him,--well, i' faith I should,
	When all's spent, he 'ld be cross'd then, an he could.
	'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind,
	That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.

	[Exit]

First Lord	Where be our men?

Servant	Here, my lord, in readiness.

Second Lord	Our horses!

	[Re-enter FLAVIUS, with the casket]

TIMON	          O my friends,
	I have one word to say to you: look you, my good lord,
	I must entreat you, honour me so much
	As to advance this jewel; accept it and wear it,
	Kind my lord.

First Lord	I am so far already in your gifts,--

All	So are we all.

	[Enter a Servant]

Servant	My lord, there are certain nobles of the senate
	Newly alighted, and come to visit you.

TIMON	They are fairly welcome.

FLAVIUS	I beseech your honour,
	Vouchsafe me a word; it does concern you near.

TIMON	Near! why then, another time I'll hear thee:
	I prithee, let's be provided to show them
	entertainment.

FLAVIUS	[Aside]  I scarce know how.

	[Enter a Second Servant]

Second Servant	May it please your honour, Lord Lucius,
	Out of his free love, hath presented to you
	Four milk-white horses, trapp'd in silver.

TIMON	I shall accept them fairly; let the presents
	Be worthily entertain'd.

	[Enter a third Servant]

		   How now! what news?

Third Servant	Please you, my lord, that honourable
	gentleman, Lord Lucullus, entreats your company
	to-morrow to hunt with him, and has sent your honour
	two brace of greyhounds.

TIMON	I'll hunt with him; and let them be received,
	Not without fair reward.

FLAVIUS	[Aside]                What will this come to?
	He commands us to provide, and give great gifts,
	And all out of an empty coffer:
	Nor will he know his purse, or yield me this,
	To show him what a beggar his heart is,
	Being of no power to make his wishes good:
	His promises fly so beyond his state
	That what he speaks is all in debt; he owes
	For every word: he is so kind that he now
	Pays interest for 't; his land's put to their books.
	Well, would I were gently put out of office
	Before I were forced out!
	Happier is he that has no friend to feed
	Than such that do e'en enemies exceed.
	I bleed inwardly for my lord.

	[Exit]

TIMON	You do yourselves
	Much wrong, you bate too much of your own merits:
	Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.

Second Lord	With more than common thanks I will receive it.

Third Lord	O, he's the very soul of bounty!

TIMON	And now I remember, my lord, you gave
	Good words the other day of a bay courser
	I rode on: it is yours, because you liked it.

Second Lord	O, I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, in that.

TIMON	You may take my word, my lord; I know, no man
	Can justly praise but what he does affect:
	I weigh my friend's affection with mine own;
	I'll tell you true. I'll call to you.

All Lords	O, none so welcome.

TIMON	I take all and your several visitations
	So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give;
	Methinks, I could deal kingdoms to my friends,
	And ne'er be weary. Alcibiades,
	Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich;
	It comes in charity to thee: for all thy living
	Is 'mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast
	Lie in a pitch'd field.

ALCIBIADES	Ay, defiled land, my lord.

First Lord	We are so virtuously bound--

TIMON	And so
	Am I to you.

Second Lord	So infinitely endear'd--

TIMON	All to you. Lights, more lights!

First Lord	The best of happiness,
	Honour and fortunes, keep with you, Lord Timon!

TIMON	Ready for his friends.

	[Exeunt all but APEMANTUS and TIMON]

APEMANTUS	What a coil's here!
	Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!
	I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums
	That are given for 'em. Friendship's full of dregs:
	Methinks, false hearts should never have sound legs,
	Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on court'sies.

TIMON	Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen, I would be
	good to thee.

APEMANTUS	No, I'll nothing: for if I should be bribed too,
	there would be none left to rail upon thee, and then
	thou wouldst sin the faster. Thou givest so long,
	Timon, I fear me thou wilt give away thyself in
	paper shortly: what need these feasts, pomps and
	vain-glories?

TIMON	Nay, an you begin to rail on society once, I am
	sworn not to give regard to you. Farewell; and come
	with better music.

	[Exit]

APEMANTUS	So:
	Thou wilt not hear me now; thou shalt not then:
	I'll lock thy heaven from thee.
	O, that men's ears should be
	To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!

	[Exit]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT II



SCENE I	A Senator's house.


	[Enter Senator, with papers in his hand]

Senator	And late, five thousand: to Varro and to Isidore
	He owes nine thousand; besides my former sum,
	Which makes it five and twenty. Still in motion
	Of raging waste? It cannot hold; it will not.
	If I want gold, steal but a beggar's dog,
	And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.
	If I would sell my horse, and buy twenty more
	Better than he, why, give my horse to Timon,
	Ask nothing, give it him, it foals me, straight,
	And able horses. No porter at his gate,
	But rather one that smiles and still invites
	All that pass by. It cannot hold: no reason
	Can found his state in safety. Caphis, ho!
	Caphis, I say!

	[Enter CAPHIS]

CAPHIS	Here, sir; what is your pleasure?

Senator	Get on your cloak, and haste you to Lord Timon;
	Importune him for my moneys; be not ceased
	With slight denial, nor then silenced when--
	'Commend me to your master'--and the cap
	Plays in the right hand, thus: but tell him,
	My uses cry to me, I must serve my turn
	Out of mine own; his days and times are past
	And my reliances on his fracted dates
	Have smit my credit: I love and honour him,
	But must not break my back to heal his finger;
	Immediate are my needs, and my relief
	Must not be toss'd and turn'd to me in words,
	But find supply immediate. Get you gone:
	Put on a most importunate aspect,
	A visage of demand; for, I do fear,
	When every feather sticks in his own wing,
	Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
	Which flashes now a phoenix. Get you gone.

CAPHIS	I go, sir.

Senator	'I go, sir!'--Take the bonds along with you,
	And have the dates in contempt.

CAPHIS	I will, sir.

Senator	Go.

	[Exeunt]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT II



SCENE II	The same. A hall in Timon's house.


	[Enter FLAVIUS, with many bills in his hand]

FLAVIUS	No care, no stop! so senseless of expense,
	That he will neither know how to maintain it,
	Nor cease his flow of riot: takes no account
	How things go from him, nor resumes no care
	Of what is to continue: never mind
	Was to be so unwise, to be so kind.
	What shall be done? he will not hear, till feel:
	I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
	Fie, fie, fie, fie!

	[Enter CAPHIS, and the Servants of Isidore and Varro]

CAPHIS	Good even, Varro: what,
	You come for money?

Varro's Servant	Is't not your business too?

CAPHIS	It is: and yours too, Isidore?

Isidore's Servant	It is so.

CAPHIS	Would we were all discharged!

Varro's Servant	I fear it.

CAPHIS	Here comes the lord.

	[Enter TIMON, ALCIBIADES, and Lords, &c]

TIMON	So soon as dinner's done, we'll forth again,
	My Alcibiades. With me? what is your will?

CAPHIS	My lord, here is a note of certain dues.

TIMON	Dues! Whence are you?

CAPHIS	Of Athens here, my lord.

TIMON	Go to my steward.

CAPHIS	Please it your lordship, he hath put me off
	To the succession of new days this month:
	My master is awaked by great occasion
	To call upon his own, and humbly prays you
	That with your other noble parts you'll suit
	In giving him his right.

TIMON	Mine honest friend,
	I prithee, but repair to me next morning.

CAPHIS	Nay, good my lord,--

TIMON	Contain thyself, good friend.

Varro's Servant	One Varro's servant, my good lord,--

Isidore's Servant	From Isidore;
	He humbly prays your speedy payment.

CAPHIS	If you did know, my lord, my master's wants--

Varro's Servant	'Twas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks And past.

Isidore's Servant	         Your steward puts me off, my lord;
	And I am sent expressly to your lordship.

TIMON	Give me breath.
	I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on;
	I'll wait upon you instantly.

	[Exeunt ALCIBIADES and Lords]

	[To FLAVIUS]

		        Come hither: pray you,
	How goes the world, that I am thus encounter'd
	With clamourous demands of date-broke bonds,
	And the detention of long-since-due debts,
	Against my honour?

FLAVIUS	                  Please you, gentlemen,
	The time is unagreeable to this business:
	Your importunacy cease till after dinner,
	That I may make his lordship understand
	Wherefore you are not paid.

TIMON	Do so, my friends. See them well entertain'd.

	[Exit]

FLAVIUS	Pray, draw near.

	[Exit]

	[Enter APEMANTUS and Fool]

CAPHIS	Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus:
	let's ha' some sport with 'em.

Varro's Servant	Hang him, he'll abuse us.

Isidore's Servant	A plague upon him, dog!

Varro's Servant	How dost, fool?

APEMANTUS	Dost dialogue with thy shadow?

Varro's Servant	I speak not to thee.

APEMANTUS	No,'tis to thyself.

	[To the Fool]

	Come away.

Isidore's Servant	There's the fool hangs on your back already.

APEMANTUS	No, thou stand'st single, thou'rt not on him yet.

CAPHIS	Where's the fool now?

APEMANTUS	He last asked the question. Poor rogues, and
	usurers' men! bawds between gold and want!

All Servants	What are we, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS	Asses.

All Servants	Why?

APEMANTUS	That you ask me what you are, and do not know
	yourselves. Speak to 'em, fool.

Fool	How do you, gentlemen?

All Servants	Gramercies, good fool: how does your mistress?

Fool	She's e'en setting on water to scald such chickens
	as you are. Would we could see you at Corinth!

APEMANTUS	Good! gramercy.

	[Enter Page]

Fool	Look you, here comes my mistress' page.

Page	[To the Fool]  Why, how now, captain! what do you
	in this wise company? How dost thou, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS	Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answer
	thee profitably.

Page	Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription of
	these letters: I know not which is which.

APEMANTUS	Canst not read?

Page	No.

APEMANTUS	There will little learning die then, that day thou
	art hanged. This is to Lord Timon; this to
	Alcibiades. Go; thou wast born a bastard, and thou't
	die a bawd.

Page	Thou wast whelped a dog, and thou shalt famish a
	dog's death. Answer not; I am gone.

	[Exit]

APEMANTUS	E'en so thou outrunnest grace. Fool, I will go with
	you to Lord Timon's.

Fool	Will you leave me there?

APEMANTUS	If Timon stay at home. You three serve three usurers?

All Servants	Ay; would they served us!

APEMANTUS	So would I,--as good a trick as ever hangman served thief.

Fool	Are you three usurers' men?

All Servants	Ay, fool.

Fool	I think no usurer but has a fool to his servant: my
	mistress is one, and I am her fool. When men come
	to borrow of your masters, they approach sadly, and
	go away merry; but they enter my mistress' house
	merrily, and go away sadly: the reason of this?

Varro's Servant	I could render one.

APEMANTUS	Do it then, that we may account thee a whoremaster
	and a knave; which not-withstanding, thou shalt be
	no less esteemed.

Varro's Servant	What is a whoremaster, fool?

Fool	A fool in good clothes, and something like thee.
	'Tis a spirit: sometime't appears like a lord;
	sometime like a lawyer; sometime like a philosopher,
	with two stones moe than's artificial one: he is
	very often like a knight; and, generally, in all
	shapes that man goes up and down in from fourscore
	to thirteen, this spirit walks in.

Varro's Servant	Thou art not altogether a fool.

Fool	Nor thou altogether a wise man: as much foolery as
	I have, so much wit thou lackest.

APEMANTUS	That answer might have become Apemantus.

All Servants	Aside, aside; here comes Lord Timon.

	[Re-enter TIMON and FLAVIUS]

APEMANTUS	Come with me, fool, come.

Fool	I do not always follow lover, elder brother and
	woman; sometime the philosopher.

	[Exeunt APEMANTUS and Fool]

FLAVIUS	Pray you, walk near: I'll speak with you anon.

	[Exeunt Servants]

TIMON	You make me marvel: wherefore ere this time
	Had you not fully laid my state before me,
	That I might so have rated my expense,
	As I had leave of means?

FLAVIUS	You would not hear me,
	At many leisures I proposed.

TIMON	Go to:
	Perchance some single vantages you took.
	When my indisposition put you back:
	And that unaptness made your minister,
	Thus to excuse yourself.

FLAVIUS	O my good lord,
	At many times I brought in my accounts,
	Laid them before you; you would throw them off,
	And say, you found them in mine honesty.
	When, for some trifling present, you have bid me
	Return so much, I have shook my head and wept;
	Yea, 'gainst the authority of manners, pray'd you
	To hold your hand more close: I did endure
	Not seldom, nor no slight cheques, when I have
	Prompted you in the ebb of your estate
	And your great flow of debts. My loved lord,
	Though you hear now, too late--yet now's a time--
	The greatest of your having lacks a half
	To pay your present debts.

TIMON	Let all my land be sold.

FLAVIUS	'Tis all engaged, some forfeited and gone;
	And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
	Of present dues: the future comes apace:
	What shall defend the interim? and at length
	How goes our reckoning?

TIMON	To Lacedaemon did my land extend.

FLAVIUS	O my good lord, the world is but a word:
	Were it all yours to give it in a breath,
	How quickly were it gone!

TIMON	You tell me true.

FLAVIUS	If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood,
	Call me before the exactest auditors
	And set me on the proof. So the gods bless me,
	When all our offices have been oppress'd
	With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept
	With drunken spilth of wine, when every room
	Hath blazed with lights and bray'd with minstrelsy,
	I have retired me to a wasteful cock,
	And set mine eyes at flow.

TIMON	Prithee, no more.

FLAVIUS	Heavens, have I said, the bounty of this lord!
	How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants
	This night englutted! Who is not Timon's?
	What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is
	Lord Timon's?
	Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon!
	Ah, when the means are gone that buy this praise,
	The breath is gone whereof this praise is made:
	Feast-won, fast-lost; one cloud of winter showers,
	These flies are couch'd.

TIMON	Come, sermon me no further:
	No villanous bounty yet hath pass'd my heart;
	Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.
	Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack,
	To think I shall lack friends? Secure thy heart;
	If I would broach the vessels of my love,
	And try the argument of hearts by borrowing,
	Men and men's fortunes could I frankly use
	As I can bid thee speak.

FLAVIUS	Assurance bless your thoughts!

TIMON	And, in some sort, these wants of mine are crown'd,
	That I account them blessings; for by these
	Shall I try friends: you shall perceive how you
	Mistake my fortunes; I am wealthy in my friends.
	Within there! Flaminius! Servilius!

	[Enter FLAMINIUS, SERVILIUS, and other Servants]

Servants	My lord? my lord?

TIMON	I will dispatch you severally; you to Lord Lucius;
	to Lord Lucullus you: I hunted with his honour
	to-day: you, to Sempronius: commend me to their
	loves, and, I am proud, say, that my occasions have
	found time to use 'em toward a supply of money: let
	the request be fifty talents.

FLAMINIUS	As you have said, my lord.

FLAVIUS	[Aside]  Lord Lucius and Lucullus? hum!

TIMON	Go you, sir, to the senators--
	Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have
	Deserved this hearing--bid 'em send o' the instant
	A thousand talents to me.

FLAVIUS	I have been bold--
	For that I knew it the most general way--
	To them to use your signet and your name;
	But they do shake their heads, and I am here
	No richer in return.

TIMON	Is't true? can't be?

FLAVIUS	They answer, in a joint and corporate voice,
	That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot
	Do what they would; are sorry--you are honourable,--
	But yet they could have wish'd--they know not--
	Something hath been amiss--a noble nature
	May catch a wrench--would all were well--'tis pity;--
	And so, intending other serious matters,
	After distasteful looks and these hard fractions,
	With certain half-caps and cold-moving nods
	They froze me into silence.

TIMON	You gods, reward them!
	Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows
	Have their ingratitude in them hereditary:
	Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows;
	'Tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind;
	And nature, as it grows again toward earth,
	Is fashion'd for the journey, dull and heavy.

	[To a Servant]

	Go to Ventidius.

	[To FLAVIUS]

	Prithee, be not sad,
	Thou art true and honest; ingeniously I speak.
	No blame belongs to thee.

	[To Servant]

		    Ventidius lately
	Buried his father; by whose death he's stepp'd
	Into a great estate: when he was poor,
	Imprison'd and in scarcity of friends,
	I clear'd him with five talents: greet him from me;
	Bid him suppose some good necessity
	Touches his friend, which craves to be remember'd
	With those five talents.

	[Exit Servant]

	[To FLAVIUS]

		   That had, give't these fellows
	To whom 'tis instant due. Ne'er speak, or think,
	That Timon's fortunes 'mong his friends can sink.

FLAVIUS	I would I could not think it: that thought is
	bounty's foe;
	Being free itself, it thinks all others so.

	[Exeunt]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT III



SCENE I	A room in Lucullus' house.


	[FLAMINIUS waiting. Enter a Servant to him]

Servant	I have told my lord of you; he is coming down to you.

FLAMINIUS	I thank you, sir.

	[Enter LUCULLUS]

Servant	Here's my lord.

LUCULLUS	[Aside]  One of Lord Timon's men? a gift, I
	warrant. Why, this hits right; I dreamt of a silver
	basin and ewer to-night. Flaminius, honest
	Flaminius; you are very respectively welcome, sir.
	Fill me some wine.

	[Exit Servants]

	And how does that honourable, complete, free-hearted
	gentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good lord
	and master?

FLAMINIUS	His health is well sir.

LUCULLUS	I am right glad that his health is well, sir: and
	what hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius?

FLAMINIUS	'Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir; which, in my
	lord's behalf, I come to entreat your honour to
	supply; who, having great and instant occasion to
	use fifty talents, hath sent to your lordship to
	furnish him, nothing doubting your present
	assistance therein.

LUCULLUS	La, la, la, la! 'nothing doubting,' says he? Alas,
	good lord! a noble gentleman 'tis, if he would not
	keep so good a house. Many a time and often I ha'
	dined with him, and told him on't, and come again to
	supper to him, of purpose to have him spend less,
	and yet he would embrace no counsel, take no warning
	by my coming. Every man has his fault, and honesty
	is his: I ha' told him on't, but I could ne'er get
	him from't.

	[Re-enter Servant, with wine]

Servant	Please your lordship, here is the wine.

LUCULLUS	Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise. Here's to thee.

FLAMINIUS	Your lordship speaks your pleasure.

LUCULLUS	I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt
	spirit--give thee thy due--and one that knows what
	belongs to reason; and canst use the time well, if
	the time use thee well: good parts in thee.

	[To Servant]

	Get you gone, sirrah.

	[Exit Servant]

	Draw nearer, honest Flaminius. Thy lord's a
	bountiful gentleman: but thou art wise; and thou
	knowest well enough, although thou comest to me,
	that this is no time to lend money, especially upon
	bare friendship, without security. Here's three
	solidares for thee: good boy, wink at me, and say
	thou sawest me not. Fare thee well.

FLAMINIUS	Is't possible the world should so much differ,
	And we alive that lived? Fly, damned baseness,
	To him that worships thee!

	[Throwing the money back]

LUCULLUS	Ha! now I see thou art a fool, and fit for thy master.

	[Exit]

FLAMINIUS	May these add to the number that may scald thee!
	Let moulten coin be thy damnation,
	Thou disease of a friend, and not himself!
	Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,
	It turns in less than two nights? O you gods,
	I feel master's passion! this slave,
	Unto his honour, has my lord's meat in him:
	Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment,
	When he is turn'd to poison?
	O, may diseases only work upon't!
	And, when he's sick to death, let not that part of nature
	Which my lord paid for, be of any power
	To expel sickness, but prolong his hour!

	[Exit]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT III



SCENE II	A public place.


	[Enter LUCILIUS, with three Strangers]

LUCILIUS	Who, the Lord Timon? he is my very good friend, and
	an honourable gentleman.

First Stranger	We know him for no less, though we are but strangers
	to him. But I can tell you one thing, my lord, and
	which I hear from common rumours: now Lord Timon's
	happy hours are done and past, and his estate
	shrinks from him.

LUCILIUS	Fie, no, do not believe it; he cannot want for money.

Second Stranger	But believe you this, my lord, that, not long ago,
	one of his men was with the Lord Lucullus to borrow
	so many talents, nay, urged extremely for't and
	showed what necessity belonged to't, and yet was denied.

LUCILIUS	How!

Second Stranger	I tell you, denied, my lord.

LUCILIUS	What a strange case was that! now, before the gods,
	I am ashamed on't. Denied that honourable man!
	there was very little honour showed in't. For my own
	part, I must needs confess, I have received some
	small kindnesses from him, as money, plate, jewels
	and such-like trifles, nothing comparing to his;
	yet, had he mistook him and sent to me, I should
	ne'er have denied his occasion so many talents.

	[Enter SERVILIUS]

SERVILIUS	See, by good hap, yonder's my lord;
	I have sweat to see his honour. My honoured lord,--

	[To LUCIUS]

LUCILIUS	Servilius! you are kindly met, sir. Fare thee well:
	commend me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my very
	exquisite friend.

SERVILIUS	May it please your honour, my lord hath sent--

LUCILIUS	Ha! what has he sent? I am so much endeared to
	that lord; he's ever sending: how shall I thank
	him, thinkest thou? And what has he sent now?

SERVILIUS	Has only sent his present occasion now, my lord;
	requesting your lordship to supply his instant use
	with so many talents.

LUCILIUS	I know his lordship is but merry with me;
	He cannot want fifty five hundred talents.

SERVILIUS	But in the mean time he wants less, my lord.
	If his occasion were not virtuous,
	I should not urge it half so faithfully.

LUCILIUS	Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?

SERVILIUS	Upon my soul,'tis true, sir.

LUCILIUS	What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself
	against such a good time, when I might ha' shown
	myself honourable! how unluckily it happened, that I
	should purchase the day before for a little part,
	and undo a great deal of honoured! Servilius, now,
	before the gods, I am not able to do,--the more
	beast, I say:--I was sending to use Lord Timon
	myself, these gentlemen can witness! but I would
	not, for the wealth of Athens, I had done't now.
	Commend me bountifully to his good lordship; and I
	hope his honour will conceive the fairest of me,
	because I have no power to be kind: and tell him
	this from me, I count it one of my greatest
	afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an
	honourable gentleman. Good Servilius, will you
	befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to him?

SERVILIUS	Yes, sir, I shall.

LUCILIUS	I'll look you out a good turn, Servilius.

	[Exit SERVILIUS]

	True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed;
	And he that's once denied will hardly speed.

	[Exit]

First Stranger	Do you observe this, Hostilius?

Second Stranger	Ay, too well.

First Stranger	Why, this is the world's soul; and just of the
	same piece
	Is every flatterer's spirit. Who can call him
	His friend that dips in the same dish? for, in
	My knowing, Timon has been this lord's father,
	And kept his credit with his purse,
	Supported his estate; nay, Timon's money
	Has paid his men their wages: he ne'er drinks,
	But Timon's silver treads upon his lip;
	And yet--O, see the monstrousness of man
	When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!--
	He does deny him, in respect of his,
	What charitable men afford to beggars.

Third Stranger	Religion groans at it.

First Stranger	For mine own part,
	I never tasted Timon in my life,
	Nor came any of his bounties over me,
	To mark me for his friend; yet, I protest,
	For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue
	And honourable carriage,
	Had his necessity made use of me,
	I would have put my wealth into donation,
	And the best half should have return'd to him,
	So much I love his heart: but, I perceive,
	Men must learn now with pity to dispense;
	For policy sits above conscience.

	[Exeunt]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT III



SCENE III	A room in Sempronius' house.


	[Enter SEMPRONIUS, and a Servant of TIMON's]

SEMPRONIUS	Must he needs trouble me in 't,--hum!--'bove
	all others?
	He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus;
	And now Ventidius is wealthy too,
	Whom he redeem'd from prison: all these
	Owe their estates unto him.

Servant	My lord,
	They have all been touch'd and found base metal, for
	They have au denied him.

SEMPRONIUS	How! have they denied him?
	Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him?
	And does he send to me? Three? hum!
	It shows but little love or judgment in him:
	Must I be his last refuge! His friends, like
	physicians,
	Thrive, give him over: must I take the cure upon me?
	Has much disgraced me in't; I'm angry at him,
	That might have known my place: I see no sense for't,
	But his occasion might have woo'd me first;
	For, in my conscience, I was the first man
	That e'er received gift from him:
	And does he think so backwardly of me now,
	That I'll requite its last? No:
	So it may prove an argument of laughter
	To the rest, and 'mongst lords I be thought a fool.
	I'ld rather than the worth of thrice the sum,
	Had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake;
	I'd such a courage to do him good. But now return,
	And with their faint reply this answer join;
	Who bates mine honour shall not know my coin.

	[Exit]

Servant	Excellent! Your lordship's a goodly villain. The
	devil knew not what he did when he made man
	politic; he crossed himself by 't: and I cannot
	think but, in the end, the villainies of man will
	set him clear. How fairly this lord strives to
	appear foul! takes virtuous copies to be wicked,
	like those that under hot ardent zeal would set
	whole realms on fire: Of such a nature is his
	politic love.
	This was my lord's best hope; now all are fled,
	Save only the gods: now his friends are dead,
	Doors, that were ne'er acquainted with their wards
	Many a bounteous year must be employ'd
	Now to guard sure their master.
	And this is all a liberal course allows;
	Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.

	[Exit]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT III



SCENE IV	The same. A hall in Timon's house.


	[Enter two Servants of Varro, and the Servant of
	LUCIUS, meeting TITUS, HORTENSIUS, and other
	Servants of TIMON's creditors, waiting his coming out]

Varro's
First Servant	Well met; good morrow, Titus and Hortensius.

TITUS	The like to you kind Varro.

HORTENSIUS	Lucius!
	What, do we meet together?

Lucilius' Servant	Ay, and I think
	One business does command us all; for mine Is money.

TITUS	So is theirs and ours.

	[Enter PHILOTUS]

Lucilius' Servant	And Sir Philotus too!

PHILOTUS	Good day at once.

Lucilius' Servant	                  Welcome, good brother.
	What do you think the hour?

PHILOTUS	Labouring for nine.

Lucilius' Servant	So much?

PHILOTUS	Is not my lord seen yet?

Lucilius' Servant	Not yet.

PHILOTUS	I wonder on't; he was wont to shine at seven.

Lucilius' Servant	Ay, but the days are wax'd shorter with him:
	You must consider that a prodigal course
	Is like the sun's; but not, like his, recoverable.
	I fear 'tis deepest winter in Lord Timon's purse;
	That is one may reach deep enough, and yet
	Find little.

PHILOTUS	I am of your fear for that.

TITUS	I'll show you how to observe a strange event.
	Your lord sends now for money.

HORTENSIUS	Most true, he does.

TITUS	And he wears jewels now of Timon's gift,
	For which I wait for money.

HORTENSIUS	It is against my heart.

Lucilius' Servant	Mark, how strange it shows,
	Timon in this should pay more than he owes:
	And e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels,
	And send for money for 'em.

HORTENSIUS	I'm weary of this charge, the gods can witness:
	I know my lord hath spent of Timon's wealth,
	And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.

Varro's
First Servant	Yes, mine's three thousand crowns: what's yours?

Lucilius' Servant	Five thousand mine.

Varro's
First Servant	'Tis much deep: and it should seem by the sun,
	Your master's confidence was above mine;
	Else, surely, his had equall'd.

	Enter FLAMINIUS.

TITUS	One of Lord Timon's men.

Lucilius' Servant	Flaminius! Sir, a word: pray, is my lord ready to
	come forth?

FLAMINIUS	No, indeed, he is not.

TITUS	We attend his lordship; pray, signify so much.

FLAMINIUS	I need not tell him that; he knows you are too diligent.

	[Exit]

	[Enter FLAVIUS in a cloak, muffled]

Lucilius' Servant	Ha! is not that his steward muffled so?
	He goes away in a cloud: call him, call him.

TITUS	Do you hear, sir?

Varro's
Second Servant	By your leave, sir,--

FLAVIUS	What do ye ask of me, my friend?

TITUS	We wait for certain money here, sir.

FLAVIUS	Ay,
	If money were as certain as your waiting,
	'Twere sure enough.
	Why then preferr'd you not your sums and bills,
	When your false masters eat of my lord's meat?
	Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts
	And take down the interest into their
	gluttonous maws.
	You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up;
	Let me pass quietly:
	Believe 't, my lord and I have made an end;
	I have no more to reckon, he to spend.

Lucilius' Servant	Ay, but this answer will not serve.

FLAVIUS	If 'twill not serve,'tis not so base as you;
	For you serve knaves.

	[Exit]

Varro's
First Servant	How! what does his cashiered worship mutter?

Varro's
Second Servant	No matter what; he's poor, and that's revenge
	enough. Who can speak broader than he that has no
	house to put his head in? such may rail against
	great buildings.

	[Enter SERVILIUS]

TITUS	O, here's Servilius; now we shall know some answer.

SERVILIUS	If I might beseech you, gentlemen, to repair some
	other hour, I should derive much from't; for,
	take't of my soul, my lord leans wondrously to
	discontent: his comfortable temper has forsook him;
	he's much out of health, and keeps his chamber.

Lucilius' Servant: Many do keep their chambers are not sick:
	And, if it be so far beyond his health,
	Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
	And make a clear way to the gods.

SERVILIUS	Good gods!

TITUS	We cannot take this for answer, sir.

FLAMINIUS	[Within]  Servilius, help! My lord! my lord!

	[Enter TIMON, in a rage, FLAMINIUS following]

TIMON	What, are my doors opposed against my passage?
	Have I been ever free, and must my house
	Be my retentive enemy, my gaol?
	The place which I have feasted, does it now,
	Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?

Lucilius' Servant	Put in now, Titus.

TITUS	My lord, here is my bill.

Lucilius' Servant	Here's mine.

HORTENSIUS	And mine, my lord.

Both
Varro's Servants	And ours, my lord.

PHILOTUS	All our bills.

TIMON	Knock me down with 'em: cleave me to the girdle.

Lucilius' Servant	Alas, my lord,-

TIMON	Cut my heart in sums.

TITUS	Mine, fifty talents.

TIMON	Tell out my blood.

Lucilius' Servant	Five thousand crowns, my lord.

TIMON	Five thousand drops pays that.
	What yours?--and yours?

Varro's
First Servant	My lord,--

Varro's
Second Servant	My lord,--

TIMON	Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon you!

	[Exit]

HORTENSIUS	'Faith, I perceive our masters may throw their caps
	at their money: these debts may well be called
	desperate ones, for a madman owes 'em.

	[Exeunt]

	[Re-enter TIMON and FLAVIUS]

TIMON	They have e'en put my breath from me, the slaves.
	Creditors? devils!

FLAVIUS	My dear lord,--

TIMON	What if it should be so?

FLAVIUS	My lord,--

TIMON	I'll have it so. My steward!

FLAVIUS	Here, my lord.

TIMON	So fitly? Go, bid all my friends again,
	Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius:
	All, sirrah, all:
	I'll once more feast the rascals.

FLAVIUS	O my lord,
	You only speak from your distracted soul;
	There is not so much left, to furnish out
	A moderate table.

TIMON	                  Be't not in thy care; go,
	I charge thee, invite them all: let in the tide
	Of knaves once more; my cook and I'll provide.

	[Exeunt]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT III



SCENE V	The same. The senate-house. The Senate sitting.


First Senator	My lord, you have my voice to it; the fault's
	Bloody; 'tis necessary he should die:
	Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.

Second Senator	Most true; the law shall bruise him.

	[Enter ALCIBIADES, with Attendants]

ALCIBIADES	Honour, health, and compassion to the senate!

First Senator	Now, captain?

ALCIBIADES	I am an humble suitor to your virtues;
	For pity is the virtue of the law,
	And none but tyrants use it cruelly.
	It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy
	Upon a friend of mine, who, in hot blood,
	Hath stepp'd into the law, which is past depth
	To those that, without heed, do plunge into 't.
	He is a man, setting his fate aside,
	Of comely virtues:
	Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice--
	An honour in him which buys out his fault--
	But with a noble fury and fair spirit,
	Seeing his reputation touch'd to death,
	He did oppose his foe:
	And with such sober and unnoted passion
	He did behave his anger, ere 'twas spent,
	As if he had but proved an argument.

First Senator	You undergo too strict a paradox,
	Striving to make an ugly deed look fair:
	Your words have took such pains as if they labour'd
	To bring manslaughter into form and set quarrelling
	Upon the head of valour; which indeed
	Is valour misbegot and came into the world
	When sects and factions were newly born:
	He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer
	The worst that man can breathe, and make his wrongs
	His outsides, to wear them like his raiment,
	carelessly,
	And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,
	To bring it into danger.
	If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,
	What folly 'tis to hazard life for ill!

ALCIBIADES	My lord,--

First Senator	       You cannot make gross sins look clear:
	To revenge is no valour, but to bear.

ALCIBIADES	My lords, then, under favour, pardon me,
	If I speak like a captain.
	Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,
	And not endure all threats? sleep upon't,
	And let the foes quietly cut their throats,
	Without repugnancy? If there be
	Such valour in the bearing, what make we
	Abroad? why then, women are more valiant
	That stay at home, if bearing carry it,
	And the ass more captain than the lion, the felon
	Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,
	If wisdom be in suffering. O my lords,
	As you are great, be pitifully good:
	Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
	To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust;
	But, in defence, by mercy, 'tis most just.
	To be in anger is impiety;
	But who is man that is not angry?
	Weigh but the crime with this.

Second Senator	You breathe in vain.

ALCIBIADES	In vain! his service done
	At Lacedaemon and Byzantium
	Were a sufficient briber for his life.

First Senator	What's that?

ALCIBIADES	I say, my lords, he has done fair service,
	And slain in fight many of your enemies:
	How full of valour did he bear himself
	In the last conflict, and made plenteous wounds!

Second Senator	He has made too much plenty with 'em;
	He's a sworn rioter: he has a sin that often
	Drowns him, and takes his valour prisoner:
	If there were no foes, that were enough
	To overcome him: in that beastly fury
	He has been known to commit outrages,
	And cherish factions: 'tis inferr'd to us,
	His days are foul and his drink dangerous.

First Senator	He dies.

ALCIBIADES	Hard fate! he might have died in war.
	My lords, if not for any parts in him--
	Though his right arm might purchase his own time
	And be in debt to none--yet, more to move you,
	Take my deserts to his, and join 'em both:
	And, for I know your reverend ages love
	Security, I'll pawn my victories, all
	My honours to you, upon his good returns.
	If by this crime he owes the law his life,
	Why, let the war receive 't in valiant gore
	For law is strict, and war is nothing more.

First Senator	We are for law: he dies; urge it no more,
	On height of our displeasure: friend or brother,
	He forfeits his own blood that spills another.

ALCIBIADES	Must it be so? it must not be. My lords,
	I do beseech you, know me.

Second Senator	How!

ALCIBIADES	Call me to your remembrances.

Third Senator	What!

ALCIBIADES	I cannot think but your age has forgot me;
	It could not else be, I should prove so base,
	To sue, and be denied such common grace:
	My wounds ache at you.

First Senator	Do you dare our anger?
	'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect;
	We banish thee for ever.

ALCIBIADES	Banish me!
	Banish your dotage; banish usury,
	That makes the senate ugly.

First Senator	If, after two days' shine, Athens contain thee,
	Attend our weightier judgment. And, not to swell
	our spirit,
	He shall be executed presently.

	[Exeunt Senators]

ALCIBIADES	Now the gods keep you old enough; that you may live
	Only in bone, that none may look on you!
	I'm worse than mad: I have kept back their foes,
	While they have told their money and let out
	Their coin upon large interest, I myself
	Rich only in large hurts. All those for this?
	Is this the balsam that the usuring senate
	Pours into captains' wounds? Banishment!
	It comes not ill; I hate not to be banish'd;
	It is a cause worthy my spleen and fury,
	That I may strike at Athens. I'll cheer up
	My discontented troops, and lay for hearts.
	'Tis honour with most lands to be at odds;
	Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.

	[Exit]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT III



SCENE VI	The same. A banqueting-room in Timon's house.


	[Music. Tables set out: Servants attending.
	Enter divers Lords, Senators and others, at
	several doors]

First Lord	The good time of day to you, sir.

Second Lord	I also wish it to you. I think this honourable lord
	did but try us this other day.

First Lord	Upon that were my thoughts tiring, when we
	encountered: I hope it is not so low with him as
	he made it seem in the trial of his several friends.

Second Lord	It should not be, by the persuasion of his new feasting.

First Lord	I should think so: he hath sent me an earnest
	inviting, which many my near occasions did urge me
	to put off; but he hath conjured me beyond them, and
	I must needs appear.

Second Lord	In like manner was I in debt to my importunate
	business, but he would not hear my excuse. I am
	sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my
	provision was out.

First Lord	I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how all
	things go.

Second Lord	Every man here's so. What would he have borrowed of
	you?

First Lord	A thousand pieces.

Second Lord	A thousand pieces!

First Lord	What of you?

Second Lord	He sent to me, sir,--Here he comes.

	[Enter TIMON and Attendants]

TIMON	With all my heart, gentlemen both; and how fare you?

First Lord	Ever at the best, hearing well of your lordship.

Second Lord	The swallow follows not summer more willing than we
	your lordship.

TIMON	[Aside]  Nor more willingly leaves winter; such
	summer-birds are men. Gentlemen, our dinner will not
	recompense this long stay: feast your ears with the
	music awhile, if they will fare so harshly o' the
	trumpet's sound; we shall to 't presently.

First Lord	I hope it remains not unkindly with your lordship
	that I returned you an empty messenger.

TIMON	O, sir, let it not trouble you.

Second Lord	My noble lord,--

TIMON	Ah, my good friend, what cheer?

Second Lord	My most honourable lord, I am e'en sick of shame,
	that, when your lordship this other day sent to me,
	I was so unfortunate a beggar.

TIMON	Think not on 't, sir.

Second Lord	If you had sent but two hours before,--

TIMON	Let it not cumber your better remembrance.

	[The banquet brought in]

	Come, bring in all together.

Second Lord	All covered dishes!

First Lord	Royal cheer, I warrant you.

Third Lord	Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield
	it.

First Lord	How do you? What's the news?

Third Lord	Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it?


First Lord	|
	|  Alcibiades banished!
Second Lord	|


Third Lord	'Tis so, be sure of it.

First Lord	How! how!

Second Lord	I pray you, upon what?

TIMON	My worthy friends, will you draw near?

Third Lord	I'll tell you more anon. Here's a noble feast toward.

Second Lord	This is the old man still.

Third Lord	Will 't hold? will 't hold?

Second Lord	It does: but time will--and so--

Third Lord	I do conceive.

TIMON	Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would to
	the lip of his mistress: your diet shall be in all
	places alike. Make not a city feast of it, to let
	the meat cool ere we can agree upon the first place:
	sit, sit. The gods require our thanks.

	You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with
	thankfulness. For your own gifts, make yourselves
	praised: but reserve still to give, lest your
	deities be despised. Lend to each man enough, that
	one need not lend to another; for, were your
	godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the
	gods. Make the meat be beloved more than the man
	that gives it. Let no assembly of twenty be without
	a score of villains: if there sit twelve women at
	the table, let a dozen of them be--as they are. The
	rest of your fees, O gods--the senators of Athens,
	together with the common lag of people--what is
	amiss in them, you gods, make suitable for
	destruction. For these my present friends, as they
	are to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to
	nothing are they welcome.

	Uncover, dogs, and lap.

	[The dishes are uncovered and seen to be full of
	warm water]

Some Speak	What does his lordship mean?

Some Others	I know not.

TIMON	May you a better feast never behold,
	You knot of mouth-friends I smoke and lukewarm water
	Is your perfection. This is Timon's last;
	Who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries,
	Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces
	Your reeking villany.

	[Throwing the water in their faces]

		Live loathed and long,
	Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
	Courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,
	You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time's flies,
	Cap and knee slaves, vapours, and minute-jacks!
	Of man and beast the infinite malady
	Crust you quite o'er! What, dost thou go?
	Soft! take thy physic first--thou too--and thou;--
	Stay, I will lend thee money, borrow none.

	[Throws the dishes at them, and drives them out]

	What, all in motion? Henceforth be no feast,
	Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.
	Burn, house! sink, Athens! henceforth hated be
	Of Timon man and all humanity!

	[Exit]

	[Re-enter the Lords, Senators, &c]

First Lord	How now, my lords!

Second Lord	Know you the quality of Lord Timon's fury?

Third Lord	Push! did you see my cap?

Fourth Lord	I have lost my gown.

First Lord	He's but a mad lord, and nought but humour sways him.
	He gave me a jewel th' other day, and now he has
	beat it out of my hat: did you see my jewel?

Third Lord	Did you see my cap?

Second Lord	Here 'tis.

Fourth Lord	Here lies my gown.

First Lord	Let's make no stay.

Second Lord	Lord Timon's mad.

Third Lord	I feel 't upon my bones.

Fourth Lord	One day he gives us diamonds, next day stones.

	[Exeunt]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT IV



SCENE I	Without the walls of Athens.


	[Enter TIMON]

TIMON	Let me look back upon thee. O thou wall,
	That girdlest in those wolves, dive in the earth,
	And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent!
	Obedience fail in children! slaves and fools,
	Pluck the grave wrinkled senate from the bench,
	And minister in their steads! to general filths
	Convert o' the instant, green virginity,
	Do 't in your parents' eyes! bankrupts, hold fast;
	Rather than render back, out with your knives,
	And cut your trusters' throats! bound servants, steal!
	Large-handed robbers your grave masters are,
	And pill by law. Maid, to thy master's bed;
	Thy mistress is o' the brothel! Son of sixteen,
	pluck the lined crutch from thy old limping sire,
	With it beat out his brains! Piety, and fear,
	Religion to the gods, peace, justice, truth,
	Domestic awe, night-rest, and neighbourhood,
	Instruction, manners, mysteries, and trades,
	Degrees, observances, customs, and laws,
	Decline to your confounding contraries,
	And let confusion live! Plagues, incident to men,
	Your potent and infectious fevers heap
	On Athens, ripe for stroke! Thou cold sciatica,
	Cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt
	As lamely as their manners. Lust and liberty
	Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth,
	That 'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive,
	And drown themselves in riot! Itches, blains,
	Sow all the Athenian bosoms; and their crop
	Be general leprosy! Breath infect breath,
	at their society, as their friendship, may
	merely poison! Nothing I'll bear from thee,
	But nakedness, thou detestable town!
	Take thou that too, with multiplying bans!
	Timon will to the woods; where he shall find
	The unkindest beast more kinder than mankind.
	The gods confound--hear me, you good gods all--
	The Athenians both within and out that wall!
	And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow
	To the whole race of mankind, high and low! Amen.

	[Exit]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT IV



SCENE II	Athens. A room in Timon's house.


	[Enter FLAVIUS, with two or three Servants]

First Servant	Hear you, master steward, where's our master?
	Are we undone? cast off? nothing remaining?

FLAVIUS	Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?
	Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
	I am as poor as you.

First Servant	Such a house broke!
	So noble a master fall'n! All gone! and not
	One friend to take his fortune by the arm,
	And go along with him!

Second Servant	As we do turn our backs
	From our companion thrown into his grave,
	So his familiars to his buried fortunes
	Slink all away, leave their false vows with him,
	Like empty purses pick'd; and his poor self,
	A dedicated beggar to the air,
	With his disease of all-shunn'd poverty,
	Walks, like contempt, alone. More of our fellows.

	[Enter other Servants]

FLAVIUS	All broken implements of a ruin'd house.

Third Servant	Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery;
	That see I by our faces; we are fellows still,
	Serving alike in sorrow: leak'd is our bark,
	And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,
	Hearing the surges threat: we must all part
	Into this sea of air.

FLAVIUS	Good fellows all,
	The latest of my wealth I'll share amongst you.
	Wherever we shall meet, for Timon's sake,
	Let's yet be fellows; let's shake our heads, and say,
	As 'twere a knell unto our master's fortunes,
	'We have seen better days.' Let each take some;
	Nay, put out all your hands. Not one word more:
	Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.

	[Servants embrace, and part several ways]

	O, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us!
	Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
	Since riches point to misery and contempt?
	Who would be so mock'd with glory? or to live
	But in a dream of friendship?
	To have his pomp and all what state compounds
	But only painted, like his varnish'd friends?
	Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,
	Undone by goodness! Strange, unusual blood,
	When man's worst sin is, he does too much good!
	Who, then, dares to be half so kind again?
	For bounty, that makes gods, does still mar men.
	My dearest lord, bless'd, to be most accursed,
	Rich, only to be wretched, thy great fortunes
	Are made thy chief afflictions. Alas, kind lord!
	He's flung in rage from this ingrateful seat
	Of monstrous friends, nor has he with him to
	Supply his life, or that which can command it.
	I'll follow and inquire him out:
	I'll ever serve his mind with my best will;
	Whilst I have gold, I'll be his steward still.

	[Exit]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT IV



SCENE III	Woods and cave, near the seashore.


	[Enter TIMON, from the cave]

	O blessed breeding sun, draw from the earth
	Rotten humidity; below thy sister's orb
	Infect the air! Twinn'd brothers of one womb,
	Whose procreation, residence, and birth,
	Scarce is dividant, touch them with several fortunes;
	The greater scorns the lesser: not nature,
	To whom all sores lay siege, can bear great fortune,
	But by contempt of nature.
	Raise me this beggar, and deny 't that lord;
	The senator shall bear contempt hereditary,
	The beggar native honour.
	It is the pasture lards the rother's sides,
	The want that makes him lean. Who dares, who dares,
	In purity of manhood stand upright,
	And say 'This man's a flatterer?' if one be,
	So are they all; for every grise of fortune
	Is smooth'd by that below: the learned pate
	Ducks to the golden fool: all is oblique;
	There's nothing level in our cursed natures,
	But direct villany. Therefore, be abhorr'd
	All feasts, societies, and throngs of men!
	His semblable, yea, himself, Timon disdains:
	Destruction fang mankind! Earth, yield me roots!

	[Digging]

	Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
	With thy most operant poison! What is here?
	Gold? yellow, glittering, precious gold? No, gods,
	I am no idle votarist: roots, you clear heavens!
	Thus much of this will make black white, foul fair,
	Wrong right, base noble, old young, coward valiant.
	Ha, you gods! why this? what this, you gods? Why, this
	Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,
	Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads:
	This yellow slave
	Will knit and break religions, bless the accursed,
	Make the hoar leprosy adored, place thieves
	And give them title, knee and approbation
	With senators on the bench: this is it
	That makes the wappen'd widow wed again;
	She, whom the spital-house and ulcerous sores
	Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices
	To the April day again. Come, damned earth,
	Thou common whore of mankind, that put'st odds
	Among the route of nations, I will make thee
	Do thy right nature.

	[March afar off]

		Ha! a drum? Thou'rt quick,
	But yet I'll bury thee: thou'lt go, strong thief,
	When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.
	Nay, stay thou out for earnest.

	[Keeping some gold]

	[Enter ALCIBIADES, with drum and fife, in
	warlike manner; PHRYNIA and TIMANDRA]

ALCIBIADES	What art thou there? speak.

TIMON	A beast, as thou art. The canker gnaw thy heart,
	For showing me again the eyes of man!

ALCIBIADES	What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee,
	That art thyself a man?

TIMON	I am Misanthropos, and hate mankind.
	For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog,
	That I might love thee something.

ALCIBIADES	I know thee well;
	But in thy fortunes am unlearn'd and strange.

TIMON	I know thee too; and more than that I know thee,
	I not desire to know. Follow thy drum;
	With man's blood paint the ground, gules, gules:
	Religious canons, civil laws are cruel;
	Then what should war be? This fell whore of thine
	Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,
	For all her cherubim look.

PHRYNIA	Thy lips rot off!

TIMON	I will not kiss thee; then the rot returns
	To thine own lips again.

ALCIBIADES	How came the noble Timon to this change?

TIMON	As the moon does, by wanting light to give:
	But then renew I could not, like the moon;
	There were no suns to borrow of.

ALCIBIADES	Noble Timon,
	What friendship may I do thee?

TIMON	None, but to
	Maintain my opinion.

ALCIBIADES	What is it, Timon?

TIMON	Promise me friendship, but perform none: if thou
	wilt not promise, the gods plague thee, for thou art
	a man! if thou dost perform, confound thee, for
	thou art a man!

ALCIBIADES	I have heard in some sort of thy miseries.

TIMON	Thou saw'st them, when I had prosperity.

ALCIBIADES	I see them now; then was a blessed time.

TIMON	As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.

TIMANDRA	Is this the Athenian minion, whom the world
	Voiced so regardfully?

TIMON	Art thou Timandra?

TIMANDRA	Yes.

TIMON	Be a whore still: they love thee not that use thee;
	Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.
	Make use of thy salt hours: season the slaves
	For tubs and baths; bring down rose-cheeked youth
	To the tub-fast and the diet.

TIMANDRA	Hang thee, monster!

ALCIBIADES	Pardon him, sweet Timandra; for his wits
	Are drown'd and lost in his calamities.
	I have but little gold of late, brave Timon,
	The want whereof doth daily make revolt
	In my penurious band: I have heard, and grieved,
	How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,
	Forgetting thy great deeds, when neighbour states,
	But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them,--

TIMON	I prithee, beat thy drum, and get thee gone.

ALCIBIADES	I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.

TIMON	How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?
	I had rather be alone.

ALCIBIADES	Why, fare thee well:
	Here is some gold for thee.

TIMON	Keep it, I cannot eat it.

ALCIBIADES	When I have laid proud Athens on a heap,--

TIMON	Warr'st thou 'gainst Athens?

ALCIBIADES	Ay, Timon, and have cause.

TIMON	The gods confound them all in thy conquest;
	And thee after, when thou hast conquer'd!

ALCIBIADES	Why me, Timon?

TIMON	                  That, by killing of villains,
	Thou wast born to conquer my country.
	Put up thy gold: go on,--here's gold,--go on;
	Be as a planetary plague, when Jove
	Will o'er some high-viced city hang his poison
	In the sick air: let not thy sword skip one:
	Pity not honour'd age for his white beard;
	He is an usurer: strike me the counterfeit matron;
	It is her habit only that is honest,
	Herself's a bawd: let not the virgin's cheek
	Make soft thy trenchant sword; for those milk-paps,
	That through the window-bars bore at men's eyes,
	Are not within the leaf of pity writ,
	But set them down horrible traitors: spare not the babe,
	Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy;
	Think it a bastard, whom the oracle
	Hath doubtfully pronounced thy throat shall cut,
	And mince it sans remorse: swear against objects;
	Put armour on thine ears and on thine eyes;
	Whose proof, nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,
	Nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding,
	Shall pierce a jot. There's gold to pay soldiers:
	Make large confusion; and, thy fury spent,
	Confounded be thyself! Speak not, be gone.

ALCIBIADES	Hast thou gold yet? I'll take the gold thou
	givest me,
	Not all thy counsel.

TIMON	Dost thou, or dost thou not, heaven's curse
	upon thee!


PHRYNIA	|
	|  Give us some gold, good Timon: hast thou more?
TIMANDRA	|


TIMON	Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,
	And to make whores, a bawd. Hold up, you sluts,
	Your aprons mountant: you are not oathable,
	Although, I know, you 'll swear, terribly swear
	Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues
	The immortal gods that hear you,--spare your oaths,
	I'll trust to your conditions: be whores still;
	And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,
	Be strong in whore, allure him, burn him up;
	Let your close fire predominate his smoke,
	And be no turncoats: yet may your pains, six months,
	Be quite contrary: and thatch your poor thin roofs
	With burthens of the dead;--some that were hang'd,
	No matter:--wear them, betray with them: whore still;
	Paint till a horse may mire upon your face,
	A pox of wrinkles!


PHRYNIA	|
	|  Well, more gold: what then?
TIMANDRA	|   Believe't, that we'll do any thing for gold.


TIMON	Consumptions sow
	In hollow bones of man; strike their sharp shins,
	And mar men's spurring. Crack the lawyer's voice,
	That he may never more false title plead,
	Nor sound his quillets shrilly: hoar the flamen,
	That scolds against the quality of flesh,
	And not believes himself: down with the nose,
	Down with it flat; take the bridge quite away
	Of him that, his particular to foresee,
	Smells from the general weal: make curl'd-pate
	ruffians bald;
	And let the unscarr'd braggarts of the war
	Derive some pain from you: plague all;
	That your activity may defeat and quell
	The source of all erection. There's more gold:
	Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
	And ditches grave you all!


PHRYNIA	|
	|  More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon.
TIMANDRA	|


TIMON	More whore, more mischief first; I have given you earnest.

ALCIBIADES	Strike up the drum towards Athens! Farewell, Timon:
	If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.

TIMON	If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.

ALCIBIADES	I never did thee harm.

TIMON	Yes, thou spokest well of me.

ALCIBIADES	Call'st thou that harm?

TIMON	Men daily find it. Get thee away, and take
	Thy beagles with thee.

ALCIBIADES	We but offend him. Strike!

	[Drum beats. Exeunt ALCIBIADES, PHRYNIA,
	and TIMANDRA]

TIMON	That nature, being sick of man's unkindness,
	Should yet be hungry! Common mother, thou,

	[Digging]

	Whose womb unmeasurable, and infinite breast,
	Teems, and feeds all; whose self-same mettle,
	Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is puff'd,
	Engenders the black toad and adder blue,
	The gilded newt and eyeless venom'd worm,
	With all the abhorred births below crisp heaven
	Whereon Hyperion's quickening fire doth shine;
	Yield him, who all thy human sons doth hate,
	From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root!
	Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb,
	Let it no more bring out ingrateful man!
	Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves, and bears;
	Teem with new monsters, whom thy upward face
	Hath to the marbled mansion all above
	Never presented!--O, a root,--dear thanks!--
	Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plough-torn leas;
	Whereof ungrateful man, with liquorish draughts
	And morsels unctuous, greases his pure mind,
	That from it all consideration slips!

	[Enter APEMANTUS]

	More man? plague, plague!

APEMANTUS	I was directed hither: men report
	Thou dost affect my manners, and dost use them.

TIMON	'Tis, then, because thou dost not keep a dog,
	Whom I would imitate: consumption catch thee!

APEMANTUS	This is in thee a nature but infected;
	A poor unmanly melancholy sprung
	From change of fortune. Why this spade? this place?
	This slave-like habit? and these looks of care?
	Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft;
	Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot
	That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods,
	By putting on the cunning of a carper.
	Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive
	By that which has undone thee: hinge thy knee,
	And let his very breath, whom thou'lt observe,
	Blow off thy cap; praise his most vicious strain,
	And call it excellent: thou wast told thus;
	Thou gavest thine ears like tapsters that bid welcome
	To knaves and all approachers: 'tis most just
	That thou turn rascal; hadst thou wealth again,
	Rascals should have 't. Do not assume my likeness.

TIMON	Were I like thee, I'ld throw away myself.

APEMANTUS	Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself;
	A madman so long, now a fool. What, think'st
	That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,
	Will put thy shirt on warm? will these moss'd trees,
	That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels,
	And skip where thou point'st out? will the
	cold brook,
	Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste,
	To cure thy o'er-night's surfeit? Call the creatures
	Whose naked natures live in an the spite
	Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,
	To the conflicting elements exposed,
	Answer mere nature; bid them flatter thee;
	O, thou shalt find--

TIMON	A fool of thee: depart.

APEMANTUS	I love thee better now than e'er I did.

TIMON	I hate thee worse.

APEMANTUS	                  Why?

TIMON	Thou flatter'st misery.

APEMANTUS	I flatter not; but say thou art a caitiff.

TIMON	Why dost thou seek me out?

APEMANTUS	To vex thee.

TIMON	Always a villain's office or a fool's.
	Dost please thyself in't?

APEMANTUS	Ay.

TIMON	What! a knave too?

APEMANTUS	If thou didst put this sour-cold habit on
	To castigate thy pride, 'twere well: but thou
	Dost it enforcedly; thou'ldst courtier be again,
	Wert thou not beggar. Willing misery
	Outlives encertain pomp, is crown'd before:
	The one is filling still, never complete;
	The other, at high wish: best state, contentless,
	Hath a distracted and most wretched being,
	Worse than the worst, content.
	Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.

TIMON	Not by his breath that is more miserable.
	Thou art a slave, whom Fortune's tender arm
	With favour never clasp'd; but bred a dog.
	Hadst thou, like us from our first swath, proceeded
	The sweet degrees that this brief world affords
	To such as may the passive drugs of it
	Freely command, thou wouldst have plunged thyself
	In general riot; melted down thy youth
	In different beds of lust; and never learn'd
	The icy precepts of respect, but follow'd
	The sugar'd game before thee. But myself,
	Who had the world as my confectionary,
	The mouths, the tongues, the eyes and hearts of men
	At duty, more than I could frame employment,
	That numberless upon me stuck as leaves
	Do on the oak, hive with one winter's brush
	Fell from their boughs and left me open, bare
	For every storm that blows: I, to bear this,
	That never knew but better, is some burden:
	Thy nature did commence in sufferance, time
	Hath made thee hard in't. Why shouldst thou hate men?
	They never flatter'd thee: what hast thou given?
	If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,
	Must be thy subject, who in spite put stuff
	To some she beggar and compounded thee
	Poor rogue hereditary. Hence, be gone!
	If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,
	Thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.

APEMANTUS	Art thou proud yet?

TIMON	Ay, that I am not thee.

APEMANTUS	I, that I was
	No prodigal.

TIMON	                  I, that I am one now:
	Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
	I'ld give thee leave to hang it. Get thee gone.
	That the whole life of Athens were in this!
	Thus would I eat it.

	[Eating a root]

APEMANTUS	Here; I will mend thy feast.

	[Offering him a root]

TIMON	First mend my company, take away thyself.

APEMANTUS	So I shall mend mine own, by the lack of thine.

TIMON	'Tis not well mended so, it is but botch'd;
	if not, I would it were.

APEMANTUS	What wouldst thou have to Athens?

TIMON	Thee thither in a whirlwind. If thou wilt,
	Tell them there I have gold; look, so I have.

APEMANTUS	Here is no use for gold.

TIMON	The best and truest;
	For here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.

APEMANTUS	Where liest o' nights, Timon?

TIMON	Under that's above me.
	Where feed'st thou o' days, Apemantus?

APEMANTUS	Where my stomach finds meat; or, rather, where I eat
	it.

TIMON	Would poison were obedient and knew my mind!

APEMANTUS	Where wouldst thou send it?

TIMON	To sauce thy dishes.

APEMANTUS	The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the
	extremity of both ends: when thou wast in thy gilt
	and thy perfume, they mocked thee for too much
	curiosity; in thy rags thou knowest none, but art
	despised for the contrary. There's a medlar for
	thee, eat it.

TIMON	On what I hate I feed not.

APEMANTUS	Dost hate a medlar?

TIMON	Ay, though it look like thee.

APEMANTUS	An thou hadst hated meddlers sooner, thou shouldst
	have loved thyself better now. What man didst thou
	ever know unthrift that was beloved after his means?

TIMON	Who, without those means thou talkest of, didst thou
	ever know beloved?

APEMANTUS	Myself.

TIMON	I understand thee; thou hadst some means to keep a
	dog.

APEMANTUS	What things in the world canst thou nearest compare
	to thy flatterers?

TIMON	Women nearest; but men, men are the things
	themselves. What wouldst thou do with the world,
	Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?

APEMANTUS	Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.

TIMON	Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of
	men, and remain a beast with the beasts?

APEMANTUS	Ay, Timon.

TIMON	A beastly ambition, which the gods grant thee t'
	attain to! If thou wert the lion, the fox would
	beguile thee; if thou wert the lamb, the fox would
	eat three: if thou wert the fox, the lion would
	suspect thee, when peradventure thou wert accused by
	the ass: if thou wert the ass, thy dulness would
	torment thee, and still thou livedst but as a
	breakfast to the wolf: if thou wert the wolf, thy
	greediness would afflict thee, and oft thou shouldst
	hazard thy life for thy dinner: wert thou the
	unicorn, pride and wrath would confound thee and
	make thine own self the conquest of thy fury: wert
	thou a bear, thou wouldst be killed by the horse:
	wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seized by the
	leopard: wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to
	the lion and the spots of thy kindred were jurors on
	thy life: all thy safety were remotion and thy
	defence absence. What beast couldst thou be, that
	were not subject to a beast? and what a beast art
	thou already, that seest not thy loss in
	transformation!

APEMANTUS	If thou couldst please me with speaking to me, thou
	mightst have hit upon it here: the commonwealth of
	Athens is become a forest of beasts.

TIMON	How has the ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the city?

APEMANTUS	Yonder comes a poet and a painter: the plague of
	company light upon thee! I will fear to catch it
	and give way: when I know not what else to do, I'll
	see thee again.

TIMON	When there is nothing living but thee, thou shalt be
	welcome. I had rather be a beggar's dog than Apemantus.

APEMANTUS	Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.

TIMON	Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon!

APEMANTUS	A plague on thee! thou art too bad to curse.

TIMON	All villains that do stand by thee are pure.

APEMANTUS	There is no leprosy but what thou speak'st.

TIMON	If I name thee.
	I'll beat thee, but I should infect my hands.

APEMANTUS	I would my tongue could rot them off!

TIMON	Away, thou issue of a mangy dog!
	Choler does kill me that thou art alive;
	I swound to see thee.

APEMANTUS	Would thou wouldst burst!

TIMON	Away,
	Thou tedious rogue! I am sorry I shall lose
	A stone by thee.

	[Throws a stone at him]

APEMANTUS	                  Beast!

TIMON	Slave!

APEMANTUS	Toad!

TIMON	Rogue, rogue, rogue!
	I am sick of this false world, and will love nought
	But even the mere necessities upon 't.
	Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave;
	Lie where the light foam the sea may beat
	Thy grave-stone daily: make thine epitaph,
	That death in me at others' lives may laugh.

	[To the gold]

	O thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce
	'Twixt natural son and sire! thou bright defiler
	Of Hymen's purest bed! thou valiant Mars!
	Thou ever young, fresh, loved and delicate wooer,
	Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
	That lies on Dian's lap! thou visible god,
	That solder'st close impossibilities,
	And makest them kiss! that speak'st with
	every tongue,
	To every purpose! O thou touch of hearts!
	Think, thy slave man rebels, and by thy virtue
	Set them into confounding odds, that beasts
	May have the world in empire!

APEMANTUS	Would 'twere so!
	But not till I am dead. I'll say thou'st gold:
	Thou wilt be throng'd to shortly.

TIMON	Throng'd to!

APEMANTUS	Ay.

TIMON	Thy back, I prithee.

APEMANTUS	Live, and love thy misery.

TIMON	Long live so, and so die.

	[Exit APEMANTUS]

		    I am quit.
	Moe things like men! Eat, Timon, and abhor them.

	[Enter Banditti]

First Bandit	Where should he have this gold? It is some poor
	fragment, some slender sort of his remainder: the
	mere want of gold, and the falling-from of his
	friends, drove him into this melancholy.

Second Bandit	It is noised he hath a mass of treasure.

Third Bandit	Let us make the assay upon him: if he care not
	for't, he will supply us easily; if he covetously
	reserve it, how shall's get it?

Second Bandit	True; for he bears it not about him, 'tis hid.

First Bandit	Is not this he?

Banditti	Where?

Second Bandit	'Tis his description.

Third Bandit	He; I know him.

Banditti	Save thee, Timon.

TIMON	Now, thieves?

Banditti	Soldiers, not thieves.

TIMON	Both too; and women's sons.

Banditti	We are not thieves, but men that much do want.

TIMON	Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.
	Why should you want? Behold, the earth hath roots;
	Within this mile break forth a hundred springs;
	The oaks bear mast, the briers scarlet hips;
	The bounteous housewife, nature, on each bush
	Lays her full mess before you. Want! why want?

First Bandit	We cannot live on grass, on berries, water,
	As beasts and birds and fishes.

TIMON	Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds, and fishes;
	You must eat men. Yet thanks I must you con
	That you are thieves profess'd, that you work not
	In holier shapes: for there is boundless theft
	In limited professions. Rascal thieves,
	Here's gold. Go, suck the subtle blood o' the grape,
	Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,
	And so 'scape hanging: trust not the physician;
	His antidotes are poison, and he slays
	Moe than you rob: take wealth and lives together;
	Do villany, do, since you protest to do't,
	Like workmen. I'll example you with thievery.
	The sun's a thief, and with his great attraction
	Robs the vast sea: the moon's an arrant thief,
	And her pale fire she snatches from the sun:
	The sea's a thief, whose liquid surge resolves
	The moon into salt tears: the earth's a thief,
	That feeds and breeds by a composture stolen
	From general excrement: each thing's a thief:
	The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
	Have uncheque'd theft. Love not yourselves: away,
	Rob one another. There's more gold. Cut throats:
	All that you meet are thieves: to Athens go,
	Break open shops; nothing can you steal,
	But thieves do lose it: steal no less for this
	I give you; and gold confound you howsoe'er! Amen.

Third Bandit	Has almost charmed me from my profession, by
	persuading me to it.

First Bandit	'Tis in the malice of mankind that he thus advises
	us; not to have us thrive in our mystery.

Second Bandit	I'll believe him as an enemy, and give over my trade.

First Bandit	Let us first see peace in Athens: there is no time
	so miserable but a man may be true.

	[Exeunt Banditti]

	[Enter FLAVIUS]

FLAVIUS	O you gods!
	Is yond despised and ruinous man my lord?
	Full of decay and failing? O monument
	And wonder of good deeds evilly bestow'd!
	What an alteration of honour
	Has desperate want made!
	What viler thing upon the earth than friends
	Who can bring noblest minds to basest ends!
	How rarely does it meet with this time's guise,
	When man was wish'd to love his enemies!
	Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
	Those that would mischief me than those that do!
	Has caught me in his eye: I will present
	My honest grief unto him; and, as my lord,
	Still serve him with my life. My dearest master!

TIMON	Away! what art thou?

FLAVIUS	Have you forgot me, sir?

TIMON	Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men;
	Then, if thou grant'st thou'rt a man, I have forgot thee.

FLAVIUS	An honest poor servant of yours.

TIMON	Then I know thee not:
	I never had honest man about me, I; all
	I kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.

FLAVIUS	The gods are witness,
	Ne'er did poor steward wear a truer grief
	For his undone lord than mine eyes for you.

TIMON	What, dost thou weep? Come nearer. Then I
	love thee,
	Because thou art a woman, and disclaim'st
	Flinty mankind; whose eyes do never give
	But thorough lust and laughter. Pity's sleeping:
	Strange times, that weep with laughing, not with weeping!

FLAVIUS	I beg of you to know me, good my lord,
	To accept my grief and whilst this poor wealth lasts
	To entertain me as your steward still.

TIMON	Had I a steward
	So true, so just, and now so comfortable?
	It almost turns my dangerous nature mild.
	Let me behold thy face. Surely, this man
	Was born of woman.
	Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,
	You perpetual-sober gods! I do proclaim
	One honest man--mistake me not--but one;
	No more, I pray,--and he's a steward.
	How fain would I have hated all mankind!
	And thou redeem'st thyself: but all, save thee,
	I fell with curses.
	Methinks thou art more honest now than wise;
	For, by oppressing and betraying me,
	Thou mightst have sooner got another service:
	For many so arrive at second masters,
	Upon their first lord's neck. But tell me true--
	For I must ever doubt, though ne'er so sure--
	Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
	If not a usuring kindness, and, as rich men deal gifts,
	Expecting in return twenty for one?

FLAVIUS	No, my most worthy master; in whose breast
	Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late:
	You should have fear'd false times when you did feast:
	Suspect still comes where an estate is least.
	That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love,
	Duty and zeal to your unmatched mind,
	Care of your food and living; and, believe it,
	My most honour'd lord,
	For any benefit that points to me,
	Either in hope or present, I'ld exchange
	For this one wish, that you had power and wealth
	To requite me, by making rich yourself.

TIMON	Look thee, 'tis so! Thou singly honest man,
	Here, take: the gods out of my misery
	Have sent thee treasure. Go, live rich and happy;
	But thus condition'd: thou shalt build from men;
	Hate all, curse all, show charity to none,
	But let the famish'd flesh slide from the bone,
	Ere thou relieve the beggar; give to dogs
	What thou deny'st to men; let prisons swallow 'em,
	Debts wither 'em to nothing; be men like
	blasted woods,
	And may diseases lick up their false bloods!
	And so farewell and thrive.

FLAVIUS	O, let me stay,
	And comfort you, my master.

TIMON	If thou hatest curses,
	Stay not; fly, whilst thou art blest and free:
	Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.

	[Exit FLAVIUS. TIMON retires to his cave]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT V



SCENE I	The woods. Before Timon's cave.


	[Enter Poet and Painter; TIMON watching
	them from his cave]

Painter	As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where
	he abides.

Poet	What's to be thought of him? does the rumour hold
	for true, that he's so full of gold?

Painter	Certain: Alcibiades reports it; Phrynia and
	Timandra had gold of him: he likewise enriched poor
	straggling soldiers with great quantity: 'tis said
	he gave unto his steward a mighty sum.

Poet	Then this breaking of his has been but a try for his friends.

Painter	Nothing else: you shall see him a palm in Athens
	again, and flourish with the highest. Therefore
	'tis not amiss we tender our loves to him, in this
	supposed distress of his: it will show honestly in
	us; and is very likely to load our purposes with
	what they travail for, if it be a just true report
	that goes of his having.

Poet	What have you now to present unto him?

Painter	Nothing at this time but my visitation: only I will
	promise him an excellent piece.

Poet	I must serve him so too, tell him of an intent
	that's coming toward him.

Painter	Good as the best. Promising is the very air o' the
	time: it opens the eyes of expectation:
	performance is ever the duller for his act; and,
	but in the plainer and simpler kind of people, the
	deed of saying is quite out of use. To promise is
	most courtly and fashionable: performance is a kind
	of will or testament which argues a great sickness
	in his judgment that makes it.

	[TIMON comes from his cave, behind]

TIMON	[Aside]  Excellent workman! thou canst not paint a
	man so bad as is thyself.

Poet	I am thinking what I shall say I have provided for
	him: it must be a personating of himself; a satire
	against the softness of prosperity, with a discovery
	of the infinite flatteries that follow youth and opulency.

TIMON	[Aside]  Must thou needs stand for a villain in
	thine own work? wilt thou whip thine own faults in
	other men? Do so, I have gold for thee.

Poet	Nay, let's seek him:
	Then do we sin against our own estate,
	When we may profit meet, and come too late.

Painter	True;
	When the day serves, before black-corner'd night,
	Find what thou want'st by free and offer'd light. Come.

TIMON	[Aside]  I'll meet you at the turn. What a
	god's gold,
	That he is worshipp'd in a baser temple
	Than where swine feed!
	'Tis thou that rigg'st the bark and plough'st the foam,
	Settlest admired reverence in a slave:
	To thee be worship! and thy saints for aye
	Be crown'd with plagues that thee alone obey!
	Fit I meet them.

	[Coming forward]

Poet	Hail, worthy Timon!

Painter	Our late noble master!

TIMON	Have I once lived to see two honest men?

Poet	Sir,
	Having often of your open bounty tasted,
	Hearing you were retired, your friends fall'n off,
	Whose thankless natures--O abhorred spirits!--
	Not all the whips of heaven are large enough:
	What! to you,
	Whose star-like nobleness gave life and influence
	To their whole being! I am rapt and cannot cover
	The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude
	With any size of words.

TIMON	Let it go naked, men may see't the better:
	You that are honest, by being what you are,
	Make them best seen and known.

Painter	He and myself
	Have travail'd in the great shower of your gifts,
	And sweetly felt it.

TIMON	Ay, you are honest men.

Painter	We are hither come to offer you our service.

TIMON	Most honest men! Why, how shall I requite you?
	Can you eat roots, and drink cold water? no.

Both	What we can do, we'll do, to do you service.

TIMON	Ye're honest men: ye've heard that I have gold;
	I am sure you have: speak truth; ye're honest men.

Painter	So it is said, my noble lord; but therefore
	Came not my friend nor I.

TIMON	Good honest men! Thou draw'st a counterfeit
	Best in all Athens: thou'rt, indeed, the best;
	Thou counterfeit'st most lively.

Painter	So, so, my lord.

TIMON	E'en so, sir, as I say. And, for thy fiction,
	Why, thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth
	That thou art even natural in thine art.
	But, for all this, my honest-natured friends,
	I must needs say you have a little fault:
	Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I
	You take much pains to mend.

Both	Beseech your honour
	To make it known to us.

TIMON	You'll take it ill.

Both	Most thankfully, my lord.

TIMON	Will you, indeed?

Both	Doubt it not, worthy lord.

TIMON	There's never a one of you but trusts a knave,
	That mightily deceives you.

Both	Do we, my lord?

TIMON	Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,
	Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,
	Keep in your bosom: yet remain assured
	That he's a made-up villain.

Painter	I know none such, my lord.

Poet	Nor I.

TIMON	Look you, I love you well; I'll give you gold,
	Rid me these villains from your companies:
	Hang them or stab them, drown them in a draught,
	Confound them by some course, and come to me,
	I'll give you gold enough.

Both	Name them, my lord, let's know them.

TIMON	You that way and you this, but two in company;
	Each man apart, all single and alone,
	Yet an arch-villain keeps him company.
	If where thou art two villains shall not be,
	Come not near him. If thou wouldst not reside
	But where one villain is, then him abandon.
	Hence, pack! there's gold; you came for gold, ye slaves:

	[To Painter]

	You have work'd for me; there's payment for you: hence!

	[To Poet]

	You are an alchemist; make gold of that.
	Out, rascal dogs!

	[Beats them out, and then retires to his cave]

	[Enter FLAVIUS and two Senators]

FLAVIUS	It is in vain that you would speak with Timon;
	For he is set so only to himself
	That nothing but himself which looks like man
	Is friendly with him.

First Senator	Bring us to his cave:
	It is our part and promise to the Athenians
	To speak with Timon.

Second Senator	At all times alike
	Men are not still the same: 'twas time and griefs
	That framed him thus: time, with his fairer hand,
	Offering the fortunes of his former days,
	The former man may make him. Bring us to him,
	And chance it as it may.

FLAVIUS	Here is his cave.
	Peace and content be here! Lord Timon! Timon!
	Look out, and speak to friends: the Athenians,
	By two of their most reverend senate, greet thee:
	Speak to them, noble Timon.

	[TIMON comes from his cave]

TIMON	Thou sun, that comfort'st, burn! Speak, and
	be hang'd:
	For each true word, a blister! and each false
	Be as cauterizing to the root o' the tongue,
	Consuming it with speaking!

First Senator	Worthy Timon,--

TIMON	Of none but such as you, and you of Timon.

First Senator	The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.

TIMON	I thank them; and would send them back the plague,
	Could I but catch it for them.

First Senator	O, forget
	What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.
	The senators with one consent of love
	Entreat thee back to Athens; who have thought
	On special dignities, which vacant lie
	For thy best use and wearing.

Second Senator	They confess
	Toward thee forgetfulness too general, gross:
	Which now the public body, which doth seldom
	Play the recanter, feeling in itself
	A lack of Timon's aid, hath sense withal
	Of its own fail, restraining aid to Timon;
	And send forth us, to make their sorrow'd render,
	Together with a recompense more fruitful
	Than their offence can weigh down by the dram;
	Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth
	As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs
	And write in thee the figures of their love,
	Ever to read them thine.

TIMON	You witch me in it;
	Surprise me to the very brink of tears:
	Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,
	And I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.

First Senator	Therefore, so please thee to return with us
	And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take
	The captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,
	Allow'd with absolute power and thy good name
	Live with authority: so soon we shall drive back
	Of Alcibiades the approaches wild,
	Who, like a boar too savage, doth root up
	His country's peace.

Second Senator	And shakes his threatening sword
	Against the walls of Athens.

First Senator	Therefore, Timon,--

TIMON	Well, sir, I will; therefore, I will, sir; thus:
	If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,
	Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,
	That Timon cares not. But if be sack fair Athens,
	And take our goodly aged men by the beards,
	Giving our holy virgins to the stain
	Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brain'd war,
	Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it,
	In pity of our aged and our youth,
	I cannot choose but tell him, that I care not,
	And let him take't at worst; for their knives care not,
	While you have throats to answer: for myself,
	There's not a whittle in the unruly camp
	But I do prize it at my love before
	The reverend'st throat in Athens. So I leave you
	To the protection of the prosperous gods,
	As thieves to keepers.

FLAVIUS	Stay not, all's in vain.

TIMON	Why, I was writing of my epitaph;
	it will be seen to-morrow: my long sickness
	Of health and living now begins to mend,
	And nothing brings me all things. Go, live still;
	Be Alcibiades your plague, you his,
	And last so long enough!

First Senator	We speak in vain.

TIMON	But yet I love my country, and am not
	One that rejoices in the common wreck,
	As common bruit doth put it.

First Senator	That's well spoke.

TIMON	Commend me to my loving countrymen,--

First Senator	These words become your lips as they pass
	thorough them.

Second Senator	And enter in our ears like great triumphers
	In their applauding gates.

TIMON	Commend me to them,
	And tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,
	Their fears of hostile strokes, their aches, losses,
	Their pangs of love, with other incident throes
	That nature's fragile vessel doth sustain
	In life's uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do them:
	I'll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades' wrath.

First Senator	I like this well; he will return again.

TIMON	I have a tree, which grows here in my close,
	That mine own use invites me to cut down,
	And shortly must I fell it: tell my friends,
	Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree
	From high to low throughout, that whoso please
	To stop affliction, let him take his haste,
	Come hither, ere my tree hath felt the axe,
	And hang himself. I pray you, do my greeting.

FLAVIUS	Trouble him no further; thus you still shall find him.

TIMON	Come not to me again: but say to Athens,
	Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
	Upon the beached verge of the salt flood;
	Who once a day with his embossed froth
	The turbulent surge shall cover: thither come,
	And let my grave-stone be your oracle.
	Lips, let sour words go by and language end:
	What is amiss plague and infection mend!
	Graves only be men's works and death their gain!
	Sun, hide thy beams! Timon hath done his reign.

	[Retires to his cave]

First Senator	His discontents are unremoveably
	Coupled to nature.

Second Senator	Our hope in him is dead: let us return,
	And strain what other means is left unto us
	In our dear peril.

First Senator	                  It requires swift foot.

	[Exeunt]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT V



SCENE II	Before the walls of Athens.


	[Enter two Senators and a Messenger]

First Senator	Thou hast painfully discover'd: are his files
	As full as thy report?

Messenger	have spoke the least:
	Besides, his expedition promises
	Present approach.

Second Senator	We stand much hazard, if they bring not Timon.

Messenger	I met a courier, one mine ancient friend;
	Whom, though in general part we were opposed,
	Yet our old love made a particular force,
	And made us speak like friends: this man was riding
	From Alcibiades to Timon's cave,
	With letters of entreaty, which imported
	His fellowship i' the cause against your city,
	In part for his sake moved.

First Senator	Here come our brothers.

	[Enter the Senators from TIMON]

Third Senator	No talk of Timon, nothing of him expect.
	The enemies' drum is heard, and fearful scouring
	Doth choke the air with dust: in, and prepare:
	Ours is the fall, I fear; our foes the snare.

	[Exeunt]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT V



SCENE III	The woods. Timon's cave, and a rude tomb seen.


	[Enter a Soldier, seeking TIMON]

Soldier	By all description this should be the place.
	Who's here? speak, ho! No answer! What is this?
	Timon is dead, who hath outstretch'd his span:
	Some beast rear'd this; there does not live a man.
	Dead, sure; and this his grave. What's on this tomb
	I cannot read; the character I'll take with wax:
	Our captain hath in every figure skill,
	An aged interpreter, though young in days:
	Before proud Athens he's set down by this,
	Whose fall the mark of his ambition is.

	[Exit]




	TIMON OF ATHENS


ACT V



SCENE IV	Before the walls of Athens.


	[Trumpets sound. Enter ALCIBIADES with his powers]

ALCIBIADES	Sound to this coward and lascivious town
	Our terrible approach.

	[A parley sounded]

	[Enter Senators on the walls]

	Till now you have gone on and fill'd the time
	With all licentious measure, making your wills
	The scope of justice; till now myself and such
	As slept within the shadow of your power
	Have wander'd with our traversed arms and breathed
	Our sufferance vainly: now the time is flush,
	When crouching marrow in the bearer strong
	Cries of itself 'No more:' now breathless wrong
	Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease,
	And pursy insolence shall break his wind
	With fear and horrid flight.

First Senator	Noble and young,
	When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
	Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,
	We sent to thee, to give thy rages balm,
	To wipe out our ingratitude with loves
	Above their quantity.

Second Senator	So did we woo
	Transformed Timon to our city's love
	By humble message and by promised means:
	We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
	The common stroke of war.

First Senator	These walls of ours
	Were not erected by their hands from whom
	You have received your griefs; nor are they such
	That these great towers, trophies and schools
	should fall
	For private faults in them.

Second Senator	Nor are they living
	Who were the motives that you first went out;
	Shame that they wanted cunning, in excess
	Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord,
	Into our city with thy banners spread:
	By decimation, and a tithed death--
	If thy revenges hunger for that food
	Which nature loathes--take thou the destined tenth,
	And by the hazard of the spotted die
	Let die the spotted.

First Senator	All have not offended;
	For those that were, it is not square to take
	On those that are, revenges: crimes, like lands,
	Are not inherited. Then, dear countryman,
	Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage:
	Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin
	Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall
	With those that have offended: like a shepherd,
	Approach the fold and cull the infected forth,
	But kill not all together.

Second Senator	What thou wilt,
	Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile
	Than hew to't with thy sword.

First Senator 	Set but thy foot
	Against our rampired gates, and they shall ope;
	So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before,
	To say thou'lt enter friendly.

Second Senator	Throw thy glove,
	Or any token of thine honour else,
	That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress
	And not as our confusion, all thy powers
	Shall make their harbour in our town, till we
	Have seal'd thy full desire.

ALCIBIADES	Then there's my glove;
	Descend, and open your uncharged ports:
	Those enemies of Timon's and mine own
	Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof
	Fall and no more: and, to atone your fears
	With my more noble meaning, not a man
	Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream
	Of regular justice in your city's bounds,
	But shall be render'd to your public laws
	At heaviest answer.

Both	'Tis most nobly spoken.

ALCIBIADES	Descend, and keep your words.

	[The Senators descend, and open the gates]

	[Enter Soldier]

Soldier	My noble general, Timon is dead;
	Entomb'd upon the very hem o' the sea;
	And on his grave-stone this insculpture, which
	With wax I brought away, whose soft impression
	Interprets for my poor ignorance.

ALCIBIADES	[Reads the epitaph]  'Here lies a
	wretched corse, of wretched soul bereft:
	Seek not my name: a plague consume you wicked
	caitiffs left!
	Here lie I, Timon; who, alive, all living men did hate:
	Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass and stay
	not here thy gait.'
	These well express in thee thy latter spirits:
	Though thou abhorr'dst in us our human griefs,
	Scorn'dst our brain's flow and those our
	droplets which
	From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit
	Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
	On thy low grave, on faults forgiven. Dead
	Is noble Timon: of whose memory
	Hereafter more. Bring me into your city,
	And I will use the olive with my sword,
	Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each
	Prescribe to other as each other's leech.
	Let our drums strike.

	[Exeunt]
